 U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary of Transportation Office of the Chief Information Officer   Response to Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  Docket EAB-2021-0001   1   On behalf of the U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT), Office of the Secretary of Transportation (OST), Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), the Chief Data Officer submits these responses to the subject request for information from the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building.  These responses are narrowly drawn to discuss the Department’s experiences and point of view through the implementation and delivery of its Secure Data Commons shared service. For more information about the Secure Data Commons, please visit https://www.transportation.gov/data/secure.   Any questions about this response can be directed to the DOT Chief Data Officer, Daniel Morgan at Daniel.Morgan@dot.gov.    Central Questions –  1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments that are trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based decision-making process.  USDOT Response: A key challenge facing the transportation industry and the Department’s research portfolio is an ever-increasing array of data sources and types involved in the research process. As the transportation field is impacted by digital transformation, so too is the Department’s research. To ensure that the data from the Department’s research activities is available to support evidence-based policy, the Secure Data Commons was developed. The Secure Data Commons addresses some key challenges:  • First, the Secure Data Commons provides for a shared service to address data management needs throughout the research lifecycle. Data management broadly will play an increasingly prominent role in support the evidence-based decision making process. Chief Data Officers’ (CDO) roles, responsibility, and authorities may need to evolve to match the increased prominence of data within policy. Within the Federal government, the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act provides for broad CDO authorities, which are foundational to influencing the data management needs of both research and policymaking. Nevertheless, data management needs are not always well understood, cost are not always accounted for in designing initiatives, and CDOs at the state or local government level may not be as clearly empowered. Without the clear authority of the CDO role, it is hard for the any organization to cultivate data-driven competencies.  • Second, the policymaking process is does not consistently approach the need to assess/or evaluate the impact of the policy. It can be difficult to for governments to evaluate the impact of a policy if relevant information is not collected/gathered as part the research or other evidence-building activity that supports policy making process.    U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary of Transportation Office of the Chief Information Officer   Response to Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  Docket EAB-2021-0001   2   Lack of data planning may result in insufficient granular data to support the evaluation of a particular policy. Evaluation criteria (measures) should be considered and defined during the policy making process, and data management planning should be incorporated into the policymaking process, as it has been in the research process.  • Third, data culture and a data-savvy workforce are roadblocks that must be overcome to build evidence-based policy. Organizations need to enhance staff expertise in the evidence-based policymaking process from the senior leadership to the staff level.   • Fourth, agencies need access to data analysis platforms and software to exercise enhanced expertise. Building evidence based on data relies on data engineering, analysis, and visualization software to which agencies should have access, but many currently do not. Such access may also be fragmented, inhibiting collaboration opportunities and interdisciplinary work. When investments are made, such investments seem to be made for a particular research subject area (e.g., Cancer Data Commons), and the individual research projects bear the cost of their own data management needs. Shared platforms can also more readily enable secondary data analyses. Likewise, data discoverability across organizations continues to be a challenge.  Breaking down silos and implementing standards across shared services can address the question of how external users may effectively weigh in on agency’s investments in the underpinnings of evidence-based policy (e.g. data, analytical approaches/tools, etc).  • Fifth, timely sharing of data and analysis approaches across agencies and levels of government (fed/state/local/tribal) can be a roadblock.  There is often hesitancy in sharing data or analysis approaches while they are being developed or in early evaluation, this is especially true for data/analysis that feeds into regulation.  In addition to leadership hesitancy, often there are insufficient processes or resources for effectively engaging key stakeholder/partners or expanding the diversity of the stakeholders.  The advantage of sharing early and providing opportunities for meaningful feedback and revisions is multifold: improved data sources and analytical approaches, greater “buy in” and engagement by key stakeholders in the overall regulatory outcome, and greater diversity in perspectives that feed into a more inclusive analyses and ultimately more inclusive policy.   2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making that successfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?  USDOT Response:  The USDOT Secure Data Commons (SDC) houses data sets used for innovative research in automation, safety, and other topics in transportation. Among the data sets is the National Waze Data Archive. USDOT established an agreement with Waze to archive nationwide traffic alerts and jam data on the secure, cloud-based platform through the Waze for Cities program. These data are aggregated to protect privacy, ensuring individual users and trips cannot be deduced from the Waze data provided to USDOT. A number of projects have leveraged the Waze data in    U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary of Transportation Office of the Chief Information Officer   Response to Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  Docket EAB-2021-0001   3   SDC, including partnerships with the Tennessee Highway Patrol1 and the City of Bellevue, Washington2, as case studies to explore State and local applications of the Waze data to improve roadway safety in the near term and in planning for a Vision Zero future.   For Tennessee Highway Patrol, this work aimed to better allocate trooper time to the places and times where their presence can have the greatest impact in reducing crashes, and in responding to crashes that may occur.  For the City of Bellevue, this work aimed to identify roadway segments where crash risk is highest, complimenting police-reported crashes. This will help the city plan interventions to meet their Vision Zero goals.  This work has shown that crowd-sourced data such as from Waze can enhance other roadway data to illuminate safety risk patterns and inform decision making.  3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challenges experienced by governments in their evidence building?  USDOT Response:  Scientific processes, where feasible and appropriate, should be applied in the governments’ evidence building process. Similar to scientific integrity policies, if any data, processes and guidance used for evidence building should subject to the evidence building integrity polices as well.   Such processes must be supported by sound data management programs and training in areas such as data documentation, data standards, and even an understanding of evaluation methodologies. Shared understanding of data management and evaluation must be driven vertically, across all levels of government.  Finally, scientific and data management processes are nothing if the government enters into contracts or financial assistance agreements that limit access to or otherwise do not provide for the data needed to support evidence-based policymaking. Driving best practices for transparency, open data, analysis and evaluation, and the like into the contracts of awards and other agreements will facilitate the availability of evidence for policymaking.  4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking (See: www.cep.gov) recommended the creation of a National Secure Data Service (See Commission Report at www.cep.gov). Do you agree with this recommendation, and if so, what should be the essential features of a National Secure Data Service?    1 https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/subdoc/836/2019-tn-highway-patrol-case-study-brief.pdf  2 https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/subdoc/831/2019-bellevue-case-study-brief.pdf     U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary of Transportation Office of the Chief Information Officer   Response to Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  Docket EAB-2021-0001   4   USDOT Response:   Agree. At the basic level, a National Secure Data Service should have the following features:  • Robust and standardized application programming interface (API) for data exchange  • Easy to search Data Catalog for all the data in the national secure data service • Robust and comprehensive Data Governance process • User Role control framework  • Investment in outreach and training. The success of a National Secure Data Service  would require active use and engagement by agencies across the federal government (and potentially across other levels of government)   The USDOT Secure Data Commons could act as an implementation to model a larger National Secure Data Service, or alternatively, could act as one component in a more federated approach across agencies.  5. How can federal agencies protect individual and organizational privacy when using data for evidence building? Recommend specific actions the Office of Management and Budget and/or other federal agencies can take when using data for evidence building, as well as suggested changes to federal laws, policies, and procedures.  USDOT Response:   • Collect the minimum required personally identifiable information.   • Remove explicit identifiers and applying a variety of statistical disclosure limitation methods to  the dataset before the data is released to the public • Restrict access and use administrative procedures and technology to restrict who can access the  dataset and what kinds of analyses can be done with the data to reduce the risk of disclosure, such as license agreements.   • Establish necessary processes and methodology of quantifying and controlling the risk of privacy loss as federal statistical agencies move forward with linking datasets from various sources.    • Provide clarity for how a potential National Secure Data Service would be Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) compliant and how to communicate what that level of protection would mean for external stakeholders who are interested in protecting confidential business information (CBI) or personally identifiable information (PII).   Secure Data Access –   6. If created, how should a data service be structured to best facilitate (1) research and development of secure data access and confidentiality technologies and methods, (2) and agency adoption of those technologies and techniques?      U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary of Transportation Office of the Chief Information Officer   Response to Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  Docket EAB-2021-0001   5   USDOT Response: • Access controlled at level of individual data sets • Collaboration across projects possible • Robust and comprehensive Data Governance process • Data providers have the level of control they need to be comfortable sharing data • Computational resources available within the data service with a scalable architecture • Controlled export of data products • Clearly defined data services and data retention plan  • Well defined memorandum of understanding between the service providers and the  service users.  • Cost estimates associated with using these data services • Open source technology    7. Government agencies have argued that secure data access has value because it (1) improves service delivery, (2) improves efficiency (lowers costs), (3) produces metrics for performance measurement, and (4) produces new learnings/insights from the data. Which of these propositions do you agree holds value and why? Do you have examples that demonstrate these benefits? Do you have other examples of the value of secure data access?  USDOT Response:   Secure data platforms such as the USDOT Secure Data Commons facilitate sharing of data at a level of detail, volume, and velocity that otherwise would not be possible. For example, the SDC provides access to crowdsourced roadway incident data from Waze which is nationwide, refreshed frequently, and with high spatial resolution. At the outset of the COVID-19 global pandemic, secure access to these data supported a rapid development and deployment of a system to track changes in roadway safety and congestion with respect to pre-pandemic baselines. This work now contributes to weekly updates to USDOT metrics for monitoring transportation demand. The Waze indicators track the relative change in weekly traffic Jam and Crash alerts for all U.S. metropolitan areas compared to the previous week and to the same week in 2019 or 2020.  Waze would not provide such detailed data, across the whole US, with this frequency of updating, without some assurance that the data would be stewarded well / access would be controlled.  Data Services to Federal, State, Local Agencies and the Public –   8. What are the most pressing data needs of state and local decision makers and how would making data accessible from federal agencies help meet those needs? To share data, what guarantees do data owners (or data controllers) need regarding privacy, data    U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary of Transportation Office of the Chief Information Officer   Response to Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  Docket EAB-2021-0001   6   stewardship, and retention?  USDOT Response: No response.  9. What are the key problems and use cases where collaborative work between federal, state, and local authorities’ data analysis can inform decisions? What are key decision support tools? How would greater communication about data and tools benefit expanded evidence building?  USDOT response: The USDOT’s SDC use cases (question #7) illustrated great promise of collaborative work between federal, state, and local authorities’ data analysis and  statistics can help federal and local governments on national and local level to monitor and evaluate the impact of national or local government policies, allow for more timely and granular indicators to support the policy making of the of local, national and federal.   Infrastructure for Meeting Public and Evidence Building Needs –  10. What basic public data services are essential for a data service to address existing capacity gaps and needs? What infrastructure or incentives can the federal government create that locals and states cannot?  USDOT Response: No response.      