  February 8, 2021  Mr. Lucas Hitt, Designated Federal Official Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building 4600 Silver Hill Road, Washington, DC 20233  Via: Evidence@bea.gov  RE: Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building (85 Federal Register 81179)  Dear Mr. Hitt,  I am pleased to respond to the Department of Commerce’s Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building. A call for comments was published in the Federal Register on December 15, 2020.  As the strategy director for data and measurement at Lumina Foundation, an independent, private foundation in Indianapolis that is committed to making opportunities for learning beyond high school available to all, I focus on ensuring data advances our collective understanding.  The invitation for comments posted in 85 Federal Register 81179 put forth ten questions for consideration.  While all ten questions touch upon critical elements of data policy and use, this letter focuses on question 7, which asks:  Question 7. Government Agencies have argued that secure data access has value because it (1) improves service  delivery, (2) improves efficiency (lowers costs), (3) produces metrics for performance measurement, and (4) produces  new learnings/insights from the data.  Which of these propositions do you agree holds value and why?  Do you have  examples that demonstrate these benefits? Do you have other examples of the value of secure data access?  My professional experiences inform the following responses, which are in rank order of agreement with the propositions  put forth in the call for comments.      Produces Metrics for Performance Measurement.  Metrics for performance measurement often require the use of  linked data repeatedly over a set period.    The example provided in Appendix A summarizes my experience working with colleagues at the Florida Department of  Education to develop performance funding metrics for the 28 community colleges that make up the Florida College  System.  As this example will highlight, today’s students are not enrolling in a single university for four-years, spending  their days on the quad sipping lattes and then entering the workforce for the first time.  Often, they are managing with  care their education, work and personal commitments under tight timelines and challenging contexts.  As a result, we  need longitudinally linked data (I define this as data systems linking on a regular basis) to better understand and  improve their journey.  Improves Efficiencies (Lowers Cost).  A secure, accessible data environment saves taxpayers dollars and reduces costs.  Education and training providers often work diligently to connect with employers as they develop new programs to  ensure there is a need and demand for their potential graduates.  As the example in Appendix B outlines, longitudinally  linked data helps to improve service delivery by augmenting cross-industry relationships with data to align    postsecondary program offerings with localized workforce needs.  Further, financial barriers associated with justifying  the need for a particular workforce program for less-resourced institutions are remedied.  Produces New Learnings/Insights from the Data.  When data are securely shared and linked, evidence-based insights  replace anecdotally inspired assumptions.   An example provided in Appendix C illustrates how a better understanding of students’ learning journeys can result in a  more targeted action.  In this case, linking high school, postsecondary and workforce data advanced our understanding  that students who left community colleges in Illinois were working at restaurants.  This changed the how we thought  about re-engaging learners who dropped out by recognizing a need to engage that industry sector as partners to  develop targeted interventions.  Improves Service Delivery.  Longitudinally linked data improves service delivery for every hour an employee spends  surveying and gathering data on their own is an hour they are not focusing on implementation and improvement.   Secure protocols and portals that link data allow entities to redirect human capital towards implementation and  improvement while reducing the cost associated with data collection. The example in Appendix B also supports this  point.   Lumina Foundation remains committed to the use of data to advance learning. In closing we would like to commend the  Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building for their requesting comments from researchers, evaluators,  contractors, government entities, and other interested parties to inform their work.  Data is ubiquitous and our ability to  capture, categorize, and longitudinally link it together to advance our collective understanding is paramount to creating  a more perfect union.    I appreciate the opportunity to comment and hope you find them of value.   Sincerely,   Christopher M. Mullin, Ph.D. Strategy Director for Data and Measurement Lumina Foundation 30 S. Meridian St., Suite 700 Indianapolis, IN 46204       Appendix A: Building Performance Funding Metrics  In 2014 the 28 community colleges in Florida came together, partnering with the Commissioner of Education and Florida  Department of Education, to outline nine metrics they believed best represented their performance.  Continuing into  the 2015 legislative session these nine metric constructs were developed through workgroups, meetings, and feedback  processes.  Ultimately, the performance funding model consisted of four metrics – retention, completion, job placement  and earnings.    As the metric constructs were operationalized and calculated, we soon learned the vast amount of data held in the  Florida College System’s Community College & Technical Center Management Information Systems (CCTCMIS) and the  deservedly praised Florida Education & Training Placement Information Program (FETPIP) was not enough as we had to  also identify and access data existing outside of the state’s control. Given the high profile of these metrics and  associated financial implications, it was imperative that the data be accurate.  Though we faced challenges encapsulated  in questions such as:  How would we account for students who live in Pensacola, Florida and worked in Mobile, Alabama  after graduation?  What about students who left a public institution to attend a private institution?    To illustrate the challenge, Table A1 presents the learning journey for a single student who takes a fictitious but not fully  unrealistic path over 4 years and the data source(s) needed to verify each activity for metric development.  Table A1: Data Sources Needed to Document a Four-year Learning Journey of a Fictitious Student  SEMESTER ACTIVITY DATA SOURCE(S)  FALL 2015 Enrolls in a public community college in FL CCTCMIS  SPRING 2016 Transfers and enrolls in a technical center in FL FETPIP  SUMMER 2016 Enrolls at a technical center, earns and Educational Certificate in Welding in FL FETPIP  FALL 2016 Working in the Mobile, Alabama shipyards; Lives in Pensacola, FL Federal WRIS2  SPRING 2017 Working in the Mobile, Alabama shipyards; Lives in Pensacola, FL Federal WRIS2  SUMMER 2017, FALL 2017, SPRING 2018, & SUMMER 2018  Working in the Mobile, Alabama shipyards and enrolls part-time in an Architectural Design & Construction Technology Associate in Science degree program at Pensacola State College  Federal WRIS2, CCTCMIS  FALL 2018 Works at a federal office in Alabama after graduating with an A.S. from Pensacola State College.  FEDES, CCTCMIS  SPRING 2019 Works at federal office in Alabama, enrolls at an online for-profit university to pursue a bachelor’s degree in business administration  FEDES, NSC  SUMMER 2019 Works at a federal office in Alabama, transfers to Pensacola Christian College to finish the bachelor’s degree  FEDES, FLOSFA  Note. Acronyms detailed in the text.   In short, to calculate performance metrics for this one student we would need to access students records from the  Florida College System (CCTCMIS, enrollment & completion), Florida’s Technical College System (CCTCMIS, enrollment  and completion), Florida’s Office of Student Financial Aid (FLOSFA, to capture enrollment at a private college), the  Florida Department of Economic Opportunity (work record), The Wage Record Interchange System 2 (federal-state  partnership exchange for out-of-state workforce data, now the State Wage Interchange System [SWIS]), the Federal  Employment Data Exchange System (FEDES; for federal employee work records), and the National Student  Clearinghouse (NSC; online college enrollment) to provide an accurate account of their learning journey.    The repeated and secure access to data sets, such as those listed above, accessed to implement the performance  funding model allowed us to develop metrics that colleges, and the public, would expect as we allocated millions of  taxpayer dollars to incentivize the performance of colleges in Florida.  Our ability to maintain their trust would not  happen were it not for the ability to securely link data across a range of data systems maintained by governmental and  non-profit entities.     Appendix B. Justifying Need & Equalizing Opportunity  In 2015 the ability for Florida College System institutions to offer workforce baccalaureate degrees remained under a  legislative moratorium.  In early 2015, my team and I engaged in conversations with college, legislative, executive, and  departmental leadership to understand their concerns and develop a remedy.   There were several perspectives as to  why the moratorium was put in place, but a common agreement was about the justification process for workforce  baccalaureate degree programs to be approved.  After these consultations it became clear that the approval process needed to be more transparent and improved.   Transparency had been improved the year before through the Academic Pre-Proposal Recognition System (APPRiSe); an  advance notice of a public university or college’s interest in starting a bachelor’s degree had to be posted in this  technological platform before intra-institutional meetings began to promote greater awareness and reduce later-term  resistance.    I set a meeting with a colleague at the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity and shared one concern; namely  that applications to start workforce baccalaureate degree programs had scant occupational demand data to justify the  need for the degree programs.  Those institutions who could afford it paid consulting firms to conduct occupational  demand analyses, which had the impact of limiting access.  Aside from the cost being a concern, these analyses were at  a regional level.  Since each colleges’ service area, as prescribed in Florida statute,  consisted of one or more counties  the regional demand often covered more than one college’s service area resulting in less accurate information and the  possibility of duplicated services.  Given this reality, the two agencies partnered to create employment projections by  each college’s service area.  The result is the State College Projections Portal, developed and maintained by the FLDEO  and incorporated by reference by the Florida Department of Education.  With this targeted demand now readily  available to all institutions, and program approval staff, we had a stronger basis upon which to feel confident in  approving workforce baccalaureate degree programs.  This refinement, along with others, resulted in the moratorium  being lifted, colleges submitting more accurate demand data and a cost barrier being removed for institutions interested  in serving the workforce needs of employers in their service areas by starting workforce baccalaureate degree programs.   Appendix C. Connecting Data to Improve Our Understanding  The Illinois Education Research Council (IERC), a research center created to inform education policy in the state of  Illinois, had a data sharing agreement to receive datafiles on successive cohorts of high school seniors, and this data had  been matched to postsecondary data to produce a number of studies to understanding college-going and outcomes of  cohorts of students.  Upon joining the team, we were able to secure workforce data because IERC was written into state  statute. With this linkage from high school, to college and workforce data we had the opportunity to answer any number  of relevant questions.    It is well known fact, that the community colleges serve students whose potential was structurally limited rather than  maximized often have low graduation rates.  One way to look at this problem is to think about what the “better”  alternative to a college degree is for students who start college only to stop-out.  I investigated the question with our  longitudinally linked dataset and as a result we were able to share with policymakers that college stop-outs mostly  worked in the food service industry.  And, any attempt to re-engage students who stopped-out of a community college  should include a strategy in partnership with that industry.  