  This white paper includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used,  or disclosed-in whole or in part-for any purpose other than to evaluate this document. If, however, a contract is  awarded to this offeror as a result of-or in connection with-the submission of this data, the Government shall have  the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting contract. This restriction does  not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without  restriction.  Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building Docket Number: EAB-2021-0001  Central Questions—  1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments that are trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based decision-making process.  Data silo-ing is a major impediment to effective evidence-based policy. Sharing data allows insights that may not be possible with data sets in isolation. Related is the ability to: uncover what data is available; understand what is in a data set, and; how this information relates to other data sets.  2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making that successfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?  3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challenges experienced by governments in their evidence building?  The Evidence Act’s comprehensive data catalog can help overcome some of the issues in Question 1. It allows the discoverability of data. However, the interpretation of the requirements needs to consider value-add to existing data sets. Simply repeating an enhanced version of M-13-13 requirements is not sufficient. An important point is how agencies need to fulfill:  §3511 (a)(2)(A)(i) A description of the data asset, including all variable names and definitions.  It is suggested that this be a bold and transformative effort, even if it requires significant investments of time, effort, and coordination. Rather than a free text field of limited value or cross-government consistency, this can be the beginning of a formalized way of tagging and defining variables. This should leverage existing schemas/efforts/standards where possible. NIST could work toward developing a framework with stakeholder engagement. There can be case studies of existing or new efforts that show the positive impacts. This can additionally support the requirements from the PRA.  4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking (See: www.cep.gov) recommended the creation of a National Secure Data Service (See Commission Report at www.cep.gov). Do you agree with this recommendation, and if so, what should be the essential features of a National Secure Data Service?  We enthusiastically endorse this recommendation. Beyond providing a service to access data, it should also provide a means to analyze the data. This ability should run the spectrum of user needs: from creating basic graphical results, to full-blown data science analysis. It should provide federal employees with a meaningful avenue to use fundamental tools like Python and PostgreSQL without the need to deal with internal roadblocks at their own agencies. Beyond opening such basic capabilities to the federal workforce, it eases the sharing of data, analysis, and results by providing a standard platform for data analysis. Additionally, attracting data science talent is made more difficult if the tools available to researchers are not industry standard. This is a ubiquitous issue observed across multiple federal agencies. The NSDS effort should be an agent of transformation beyond just making data accessible.     This white paper includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used,  or disclosed-in whole or in part-for any purpose other than to evaluate this document. If, however, a contract is  awarded to this offeror as a result of-or in connection with-the submission of this data, the Government shall have  the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting contract. This restriction does  not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without  restriction.  5. How can federal agencies protect individual and organizational privacy when using data for evidence building? Recommend specific actions the Office of Management and Budget and/or other federal agencies can take when using data for evidence building, as well as suggested changes to federal laws, policies, and procedures.  This could be a service provided by the NSDS when the results of any analysis will be released. Many agencies do not have the in-house expertise to effectively develop, use or understand newer protection methods like formal privacy. Beyond that, the full impact of decisions to employ a given privacy protection method may not be understood when being chosen. The NSDS, in addition to being a provider of privacy protection methods, can be a provider of institutional knowledge about the advantages and disadvantages of different methods.  While the mosaic effect is a concern, it is difficult to see how this can be accounted for without some central “bookkeeping” facility. For example, if there is going to be a privacy protection budget, who controls the budget? How is it determined what the budget is? How will the federal government keep track of the use of that budget? How many agencies are adding to the total budget? Having a central provider of data can be a first step to addressing this complicated situation.  Secure Data Access—  6. If created, how should a data service be structured to best facilitate (1) research and development of secure data access and confidentiality technologies and methods, (2) and agency adoption of those technologies and techniques?  This is covered in part by are comments on Questions 4 and 5. If organizations and federal employees are made aware of the ability to access and analyze data on a modern platform with modern analytic capabilities in place, the burden of promoting this to agencies will be reduced. This needs to be a cultural change effort. Agency leadership should be informed of the advantages of the data service analytics capabilities. Individuals need to be made aware of the service’s availability, and provided the necessary training and support, as required by FDS Action 4. Crucially, mid-level management needs to be engaged and brought onboard. They are key stakeholders in turning the desire for adoption into actual adoption.  7. Government agencies have argued that secure data access has value because it (1) improves service delivery, (2) improves efficiency (lowers costs), (3) produces metrics for performance measurement, and (4) produces new learnings/insights from the data. Which of these propositions do you agree holds value and why? Do you have examples that demonstrate these benefits? Do you have other examples of the value of secure data access?  Under the CARES Act (§1107(b)(2)(A)), MBDA was awarded funds to, in part, provide for the “education, training, and advising of covered small business concerns and their employees on accessing and applying for resources provided by the Agency and other Federal resources relating to access to capital and business resiliency”. What are the results of this? To effectively address this, MBDA would ideally have been able to follow the impacts of their CARES Act funded efforts with other federal agencies. An in-place NSDS would have made this effort significantly easier and/or feasible.  Data Services to Federal, State, Local Agencies and the Public—     This white paper includes data that shall not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used,  or disclosed-in whole or in part-for any purpose other than to evaluate this document. If, however, a contract is  awarded to this offeror as a result of-or in connection with-the submission of this data, the Government shall have  the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the resulting contract. This restriction does  not limit the Government's right to use information contained in this data if it is obtained from another source without  restriction.  8. What are the most pressing data needs of state and local decision makers and how would making data accessible from federal agencies help meet those needs? To share data, what guarantees do data owners (or data controllers) need regarding privacy, data stewardship, and retention?  9. What are the key problems and use cases where collaborative work between federal, state, and local authorities' data analysis can inform decisions? What are key decision support tools? How would greater communication about data and tools benefit expanded evidence building?  Infrastructure for Meeting Public and Evidence Building Needs—  10. What basic public data services are essential for a data service to address existing capacity gaps and needs? What infrastructure or incentives can the federal government create that locals and states cannot?   