   1430 K Street, NW   •   Washington, DC 20005   •  (202) 238-3200	 Facsimile (202) 238-3250   •   http://www.aera.net	   February 9, 2021  Lucas Hitt Designated Federal Official Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  4600 Silver Hill Road Suitland, MD 20746  Docket ID: EAB-2021-0001 Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building   Dear Mr. Hitt,  On behalf of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), thank you for the opportunity to provide comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building. Our response will focus on questions 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10.  The American Educational Research Association (AERA) is the major national scientific association of more than 25,000 faculty, researchers, graduate students, and other distinguished science professionals dedicated to advancing knowledge about education, encouraging scholarly inquiry related to education, and promoting the use of research to improve education and serve the public good. Our members use and analyze federal statistics and data in their research and depend on the objectivity, trustworthiness, and accessibility of this information to best improve, evaluate, and assess the impacts of education policy and practice decision making. Our division of Education Policy counts over 2,500 members and our Measurement and Research Methods division more than 3,000 research scientists. Furthermore, AERA members participate in 25 established Special Interest Groups focused on various aspects of evaluations and statistics.  AERA is a longstanding supporter of the work of the bi-partisan Commission for Evidence-based Policymaking and the aims of the Evidence-based Policy Act of 2018 to modernize the U.S. data infrastructure to foster evidence-based policymaking. In other letters and comments, AERA has been a strong advocate of expanding access to and use of administrative, survey, and linked data within and across agencies (as well as across states) building upon our knowledge of how to do so safely and securely consonant with privacy and confidentiality concerns.      2	  Response to Question 2  There are any number of examples of how use of federal data has informed policymaking. Most recently since COVID-19, the Census Household Pulse Survey provided invaluable data regarding the economic impact of COVID-19 on families across the nation. The indicators from the Pulse Survey have provided valuable information in guiding the development of emergency relief legislation. In the education sphere, data in the Civil Rights Data Collection within the U.S. Department of Education have been an essential resource in identifying disparities in educational access across race and gender identity.   Response to Question 4  We strongly concur with the recommendation of the Commission for Evidence-based Policymaking (“the Commission”) to create a National Secure Data Service (NSDS). We also agree with several of the Commission’s recommendations on the governance structure and protection of personally identifiable information in the use and linkages of data. We also concur that federal agencies should be able to share and link data from federal agencies under the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act (CIPSEA). We also agree with recommendation 2-7, which would allow state administrative data to be included for the purposes of use of statistical information. In addition, we concur with recommendation 4-3 to be transparent in providing a tool to search the approved projects using confidential data.  We also appreciate the ongoing work to develop and implement the Federal Data Strategy, which incorporates several practices and principles that align with the protections that would be required for the NSDS. The Federal Data Strategy principles include the ethical use of data, protecting privacy and confidentiality, and data stewardship. The five broad objectives underlying practices (govern and manage data as a strategic asset, protect and secure data, promote efficient use of data assets, build a culture that values data, honors stakeholder input and leverage partners) are essential for secure and sound data use and for engendering trust. Several elements in the 2020 action plan, including the creation of a standardized one-stop research application and the development of an automated tool for Information Collection Reviews, will be helpful for launching the NSDS.  Response to Question 5  Federal agencies are required to adhere to laws and regulations that protect privacy and confidentiality. In education, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and related guidance from the Department of Education set parameters around the use of student information, with penalties in place for the disclosure of personally identifiable information (PII). We recommend that the 2011 guidance that allows for the third-party use of data for research purposes be retained and further reinforced to reduce ambiguities regarding research and evidence-based policy use.     3	  In addition, the Education Sciences Reform Act and the statistical standards of the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) include provisions around the confidentiality of data that the agency collects along with penalties for disclosure of PII. NCES has pioneered making available data sets with PII to researchers, through restricted-use data licenses. Authorized users are subject to the laws, regulations, and penalties that apply to the NCES use of confidential data of up to $250,000 and six months in jail. The NCES Statistical Standards Program monitors the licensing process and inspections. The Institute of Education Sciences (IES) reviews analysis of NCES data. The NCES website has extensive materials on data access to public use and restricted-use data, including a Restricted-Use Data Procedure Manual (NCES 2007 at http://nces.ed.gov/pubs96/96860rev.pdf).  We mention these laws and sets of guidance both to point to their importance for evidence-based policy research in education and to signal the potential importance of such provisions in other federal agencies.  Response to Question 6  We have followed with great interest the various options to establish a National Secure Data Service. Taking into consideration the elements emphasized by the Commission in its 2017 report (see https://www.cep.gov/report/cep-final-report.pdf) and the wisdom of the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) of the National Academies in its reports also issued in 2017 (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/24652/innovations-in-federal-statistics-combining-data-sources-while-protecting-privacy), we are drawn to the careful analysis of options and recommendations set forth in the July 2020 Data Foundation Report, Modernizing U.S. Data Infrastructure: Design Considerations for Implementing a National Secure Data Service to Improve Statistics and Evidence Building (see https://www.datafoundation.org/modernizing-us-data-infrastructure-2020). We recommend that very high consideration be given to using the approach of a new Federally-Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) and to locate responsibility for it at the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) at the National Science Foundation (NSF). With the experience of NSF with FFRDCs and NSF’s role as an independent agency with the mission of the wellbeing of science, NCSES is well situated as a statistical agency to take on this responsibility.   Response to Question 7  While all of these propositions for secure data access hold high value, we would like to specifically highlight the value that federal data have in producing new learnings and insights. As one example, the Educational Opportunity Project at Stanford University has linked data on student achievement from the EDFacts database at NCES to school identifiers, poverty rates, and subgroup data. Research that has linked data from the Stanford Education Data Archive (SEDA) with school finance data has shown that students in areas that were hardest hit by the economic downturn during the great recession also were more likely to have lower educational achievement than areas that were less affected.    4	   The State Longitudinal Data Systems (SLDS) program in NCES is an exceptional example of data improvement, access, and safe and secure use that has contributed to findings in education on many important topics, including teacher preparation and retention in the workforce, the examination of elementary school test scores as a predictor of high school success, and the evaluation of state education policies. IES is also funding grants to researchers who are partnering with state education agencies to examine the long-term effectiveness of state education programs.  We also want to highlight a couple of examples where federal agency data can be used to improve service delivery and reduce barriers to postsecondary education. Students and parents filing the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) with the Department of Education are able to retrieve tax returns with the IRS Data Retrieval Tool. Creating access to data between these two agencies helps reduce the time and burden to complete the FAFSA. In addition, students seeking information on postsecondary education have used the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System for data on college costs and available majors at higher education institutions.  Response to Question 8  As the nation has grappled with and responded to the COVID-19 pandemic, there is a tremendous need for data to inform evidence-based decisions. This is particularly true in decisions that state and local policymakers are facing in how they can safely reopen schools. Public health data, including the prevalence of community spread of the virus, can inform these decisions.  The Department of Education also relies on data from state and local agencies to provide a national picture of educational policy and practice, and this is one area where guidance from the advisory committee could be helpful for federal agencies. As an example, the IES and NCES have proposed a school pulse survey to gather real-time data on in-person and remote instruction, curriculum response to address learning loss, and the availability of personal protective equipment to help ensure the safety of teachers who are in classrooms. Federal statistical agencies should be afforded the flexibility and resources in order to respond to emerging data needs of policymakers and additional stakeholders needing sound data for evidence-based decision making.  Response to Question 10  The federal government can take several actions in order to provide incentives to address gaps and needs at the state and local level. First, we encourage Congress to increase funding and ensure adequate staffing levels at statistical agencies to support state and local agencies in data collection. The SLDS program has experienced a high demand in interest from state education agencies that have been underfunded in recent years. Appropriations for this program have remained relatively frozen. Increasing funding for programs like SLDS could support additional states and priorities to continue    5	  to build and expand data infrastructure, especially at a time when states are seeing a decrease in revenues as a result of the pandemic response.  Second, federal agencies can work in partnership to develop and implement data standards to facilitate data linkages for policymaking and evaluation purposes. As one example, NCES has developed the Common Education Data Standards that provide voluntary, recommended practices for the standardization of data indicators, interoperability, and data governance models. The Office of Management and Budget and the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine can provide guidance to inform agency practices.  Thank you again for the opportunity to provide comment. Please do not hesitate to call on AERA if we can be provide additional information to inform the Advisory Committee’s thinking as it moves forward in implementing the Federal Data Strategy and the recommendations of the Commission on Evidence-based Policymaking.  Sincerely,   	Felice J. Levine, PhD Executive Director flevine@aera.net 	202-238-3201  	 