   February 9, 2021   Mr. Lucas Hitt  Designated Federal Official  Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  4600 Silver Hill Road  Washington, DC 20233   Dear Advisory Committee Members,   We are three Indigenous professors who work in partnership with Indigenous Peoples, communities,  tribal nations or villages within the United States and in other countries. Our experience and expertise  span the disciplines of sociology, demography, geography, public health, data policy and ethics,  economics, and political science. We have collected, surveyed and analyzed data from various sources  such as Indigenous communities, tribal nations, and government agencies. As a result, we have extensive  experience in the use of data for evidence-based policy-making for Indigenous Peoples.    We offer the following comments and responses to the Federal Register request for comments.    CENTRAL QUESTIONS—  1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments that are trying  to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in  the evidence-based decision-making process.   Response: Tribal governments, Alaska Native villages and Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders often  are not well represented in longitudinal datasets. There is also the issue of different definitions of these   Indigenous populations, which can inhibit comparative analyses across datasets. This spans the entire  spectrum from education, health, income and earnings and wealth, and social outcomes. Therefore,  standard empirical and statistical methods used in the evaluation of labor market, education, or health  programs or interventions are not possible. Thus, these communities go understudied. Very few data sets  oversample these populations in order to create reasonably-sized longitudinal data sets. Most data sets  such as the National Longitudinal Study of Youth contain approximately 100 observations of American  Indians or Alaska Native young people. The California Health Interview Study, however, has conducted  oversamples for the American Indians and Alaska Native population. The limiting factor is often funding  and/or contact information for this relatively small population. The sharing of administrative data for a  sampling frame from existing federal agencies may help to alleviate this issue in the future.    2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making that successfully  effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?   Response: In Indigenous nations and communities, there have been very few analyses and evaluations  made with long-term data. There’s a profound need for moving beyond cross-sectional U.S. Census data  that provide exceptional data for a specific time period, but is not designed for providing evidence for  changes over time.    3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challenges  experienced by governments in their evidence building?     Response: Increasingly the linking of administrative data is appealing as it does not overly burden  respondents with having to respond to surveys. It may also capture the universe of program recipients as  well and will not suffer from response or sampling bias. Linking across administrative data sets also  provides opportunities for evaluating outcomes and policies in multiple areas or disciplines.    4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking (See: www.cep.gov) recommended the creation of a  National Secure Data Service (See Commission Report at www.cep.gov). Do you agree with this  recommendation, and if so, what should be the essential features of a National Secure Data Service?   Response: Yes, this is an important step forward. We do caution that, especially with regard to  Indigenous Peoples and tribal nation data, there should be special care given to include Indigenous  policymakers and academics in this decision process. Historically, these populations have been left out of  these discussions and decision-making. As a result, there has been reluctance and opposition to data  collection at various levels.    5. How can federal agencies protect individual and organizational privacy when using data for evidence  building? Recommend specific actions the Office of Management and Budget and/or other federal  agencies can take when using data for evidence building, as well as suggested changes to federal laws,  policies, and procedures.   SECURE DATA ACCESS—  6. If created, how should a data service be structured to best facilitate (1) research and development of  secure data access and confidentiality technologies and methods, (2) and agency adoption of those  technologies and techniques?   Response: There are existing rules protecting the use of confidential-use data for research and evaluation  purposes. Title 13 and Title 26 exist to protect US Census and IRS data; similar types of protection should  be put into place for other administrative data sets and for linked data sets as well. The US Census Bureau  currently facilitates research and has a Disclosure Review Board to approve the release of data and  research output. Similar DRBs could be established at other agencies or between agencies when data is  linked. Data should be made available at Federal Statistical Research Data Centers for authorized  individuals who have special sworn status and who have been given approval for their research and data  use.    7. Government agencies have argued that secure data access has value because it (1) improves service  delivery, (2) improves efficiency (lowers costs), (3) produces metrics for performance measurement, and  (4) produces new learnings/insights from the data. Which of these propositions do you agree holds value  and why? Do you have examples that demonstrate these benefits? Do you have other examples of the  value of secure data access?  Response: We believe that there are tremendous opportunities for learning about tribal government and  federal government service provision through the use of secure data access. Potential areas would be  service delivery on tribal trust lands, in the Indian Health Service and Bureau of Indian Education. In  general, we agree that all four propositions exist for tribal governments and Indigenous Peoples. An  example of how secure data access may provide new learnings and insights from data is given below:    Using the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and the Integrated Longitudinal Business Database  (ILBD) and the Economic Census, (Akee, Mykerezi and Todd, CES Working Paper 20-38, 2020) found  that establishments located on American Indian reservations were more likely to survey the Great  Recession era than those located in adjacent counties off the reservation. This insight provides new  evidence of the resiliency of American Indian reservations and governments. In the absence of this  administrative data and the geographic markers which allow for identifying reservation location, this  novel insight would have been impossible to assess in publicly-available data sets.   DATA SERVICES TO FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL AGENCIES AND THE PUBLIC—  8. What are the most pressing data needs of state and local decision makers and how would making data  accessible from federal agencies help meet those needs? To share data, what guarantees do data owners  (or data controllers) need regarding privacy, data stewardship, and retention?  Response: In tribal and Indigenous communities, there is often very little information on current  employment, income and housing issues and trends. Data is difficult or quite costly to collect on their  own with little to no staff for such activities. Thus, timely data that reflects the current state of affairs and  emerging issues would be extremely useful in these communities. As the pandemic has made quite  evident, it is imperative to also have access to vital statistics data to monitor and identify health risks and  trends.  In terms of the guarantees that should be included, data users must adhere to principles of Indigenous data  governance such as the CARE principles. These principles, developed in consultation with the US  Indigenous Data Sovereignty Network (https://usindigenousdata.org/), provide a foundation for data  producers, stewards, and publishers to affirm Indigenous rights to self-determination through appropriate  data use, archiving, and stewardship.    9. What are the key problems and use cases where collaborative work between federal, state, and local  authorities' data analysis can inform decisions? What are key decision support tools? How would greater  communication about data and tools benefit expanded evidence building?   Response: In particular, there are large benefits in understanding how the education system benefits or  harms Indigenous children. There are often overlapping jurisdictions depending upon where a child lives  and the type of school he or she attends. In tribal communities, a student may attend a tribally-controlled  institution and then transfer to an off-reservation county school in later years. These school records are  not often linked across these different administrative systems. Finally, a student may enter a state-level  post-secondary institution or a private institution. The National Student Clearinghouse collects data for  degree completion, but they do not often link data at the individual level to these prior records. As a  result, we do not have longitudinal data for this population of children. Therefore, evaluating the  differences across school systems and districts for Indigenous Peoples is often severely lacking.    INFRASTRUCTURE FOR MEETING PUBLIC AND EVIDENCE BUILDING NEEDS—  10. What basic public data services are essential for a data service to address existing capacity gaps and  needs? What infrastructure or incentives can the federal government create that locals and states cannot?  Response: In particular, the federal government may authorize the linking of federal data sets that often  cover the Indigenous population where no such data (or identifiers) exist in state-level data. These  identifiers could be linked across relevant data sets. For example, in states with no income taxes, federal    IRS data may be used to identify and calculate income and earnings data for Indigenous Peoples; thus,  state-level administrative data either would not exist or not provide the appropriate information. Second,  linking of federal and state level data may expand the options for analysis that would allow for the  identifying program effects from both federal and state programs in the realms of health, education and  employment. Another area for consideration is the adoption of a tribal data standard across all levels of  government so that data on tribal citizens are collected in consistent ways that align with tribal  sovereignty.    Sincerely,   Randall Akee  Associate Professor of Public Policy, UCLA  Research Associate, NBER  Non-Resident Fellow, Brookings Institution     Desi Rodriguez-Lonebear  Assistant Professor of Sociology, UCLA  Co-Founder, US Indigenous Data Sovereignty Network    Stephanie Russo Carroll   Assistant Professor of Public Health, University of Arizona  Co-Founder, US Indigenous Data Sovereignty Network  Chair, Global Indigenous Data Alliance  