   February 9, 2021 Office of the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs Department of Commerce 1401 Constitution Ave NW Washington, DC 20230 Sent via email: Evidence@bea.gov  To whom it may concern:  On behalf of the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), I am pleased to submit the following comments in response to Federal Register notice “Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building” Docket Number EAB 2021-0001 (86 FR 5131).  Our responses address each of the ten questions in turn.   1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments that are trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based decision-making process.  In many cases, the availability of data that is perfectly safe for individuals to use is not possible because there are no resources for state and local governments to make those data available. The lack of accessible public-use data undermines trust in evidence and evidence-building. To build that trust, it is critical to provide data resources not just to experts and insiders, but to people in communities across America. For state and local governments, and for evidence builders generally, the single most important action the federal government could take is to support open data portals by local governments. These give people information about their own communities and build capacity within those communities to manage and analyze data.  Similarly, investment in education, at the K-12 and postsecondary levels, in empirical reasoning and data-driven mathematics, would significantly enhance the country’s capacity to make use of data resources.    One very basic challenge faced by evidence-builders is difficulty in determining the existence of appropriate data. Well-documented inventories with appropriate, searchable and machine-actionable metadata describing data resources would have an enormous impact.  ResearchDataGov, the single portal of the Federal Statistical Research Data Centers (FSRDCs), is a step in the right direction for improving discovery of the restricted data resources of many of the principal statistical agencies.  The FSRDC’s website now provides descriptions of many of the datasets available in the FSRDCs as well as the 600+ projects using Census data in the FSRDCs. These are important steps in improving the discoverability of data resources. Full participation    2   of all the principal statistical agencies in the single portal, as envisioned by the Evidence Act, would make a considerable difference. Inclusion of data inventories from non-statistical agencies would greatly broaden the visibility of such data. Because both ResearchDataGov and Data.gov leverage schema.org metadata, interoperability becomes possible. Similarly, encouraging -- and providing resources to -- state and local governments to create inventories of their data resources in standardized formats, could build capacity within state and local governments for managing and analyzing data, and make it possible for evidence-builders to integrate state and local data.  Even when data resources are discoverable, access is often challenging. Access includes permission for a user or group of analysts to access the data, a safe and well-designed computing environment for accessing the data, and the ability to pay any associated fees with accessing and analyzing data. Access to data that contains sensitive and private information about individuals, or that is collected with the promise that the data will be kept confidential, must be limited, and those limits inevitably create barriers. Those limits are critical for protecting the people and organization of the United States from both public and private infringements. It is, however, possible to simplify and streamline the process for providing permissions for access in a manner that will facilitate evidence-building while protecting individuals, groups, and trust in the government generally and the statistical agencies in particular. The Five Safes approach is very useful in thinking about how to accomplish this.  First, an efficient review process (such as is facilitated by the single portal, ResearchDataGov) helps ensure that only safe projects have access to the data, while reducing long delays that often plague reviews, especially when data from multiple sources is necessary, or when there are multiple custodians for a single project. Second, timely credentialing of safe people is critical, as this can also add long delays that undermine the usefulness of evidence-building. In many cases, background checks for evidence-builders take a back seat to federal employees, so ensuring that there are sufficient resources and perhaps a separate and more appropriate pathway for analysts contributing to evidence-building would also improve access. ICPSR’s Researcher Passport is designed to credential safe researchers, providing them with a transferable digital identity documenting their experience with restricted data. It is also designed to create safe researchers, by providing them with training that helps them to understand the how and why of data confidentiality protection as well as their responsibility to the people whose lives are represented in the data that they may access. Safe places are also critical. There are numerous physical and virtual enclaves both within the federal statistical system and in the broader research community. For example, ICPSR hosts a physical enclave which provides access to very sensitive data from US and European statistical agencies. It also hosts a virtual enclave that provides access for hundreds of researchers to a wide range of data resources. Similarly, the University of Michigan’s Institute for Social Research hosts both a physical enclave and a virtual enclave for linked survey and administrative data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the Health and Retirement Study. Safe outputs are made possible in each of these environments both by training researchers in confidentiality protection and by facilitating third-party disclosure review.  2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making that successfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?  A great example of the public benefits of evidence-based analysis is the work of Professor Luke Shaefer of the University of Michigan. Shaefer’s research uses both administrative and survey    3   data, including novel products of the U.S. statistical system such as the Synthetic Survey of Income and Program Participation, and state administrative data, such as the State of Michigan’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) records. Dr. Shaefer’s analyses have examined the impact of state and federal policies on outcomes such as child welfare, hunger, homelessness, and access to dental care. While working with State of Michigan UI data, he identified a problem with a deduplication program that the State of Michigan used from 2013-2015 to identify people who might be fraudulently claiming unemployment insurance. Thousands of people were incorrectly removed from UI and fined for fraud; without Shaefer’s analysis of these data, this egregious harm would never have been detected. (See a November 2020 Detroit News article on the resulting lawsuit for more information.) Shaefer’s work provides an important example of the importance of access to data resources for evidence-building, not simply because of his many scientific publications and policy analyses that can and should inform social and economic policy.  His work provides an important example of the unintended benefits that can arise from having scientists and analysts look carefully at administrative data with fresh eyes. His analysis allowed him to see problems with the administration of a critical program that were missed and ignored by those focused on its day to day administration.  3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challenges experienced by governments in their evidence building?  Very generally, the Five Safes approach is useful in thinking about how to make data available for evidence-building and scientific research. It places technical solutions, including computing platforms (safe places) and statistical disclosure control (safe data and safe output) into a necessary broader social, legal, and ethical context in which we also pay attention to safe people and safe projects.    More specifically, the collaborative efforts of the statistical agencies and academic institutional partners have created the Federal Statistical Research Data Center (FSRDCs). The FSRDCs are an excellent model of how it is possible, with considerable persistence, to create an institution that now has well over a thousand researchers analyzing survey and administrative data from over a dozen federal agencies. These well-vetted researchers and their well-vetted projects use secure virtual access or work in one of 32 secure physical locations around the country. All output goes through third-party disclosure review.  The FSRDC model has improved over time, with reductions in review times and increases in modes and locations of access.   Another excellent model is the National Archive for Criminal Justice Data (NACJD), based at ICPSR. For over 40 years, NACJD has provided the user community (academics, policymakers, journalists) with access to high quality, well-documented data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics. NACJD relies on tiered access to data. Some NACJD data is publicly available. Some are available for use on a secure local computer with a restricted data use agreement. Other data require work in a virtual data enclave (VDE). The most sensitive data are available in a physical data enclave (PDE). All data are de-identified, and analyses conducted in the VDE and PDE require third-party disclosure review. As is the case for the FSRDC network, NACJD demonstrates the value of broad collaborations between universities and statistical agencies. NACJD is a collaboration between BJS and ICPSR, and ICPSR is itself a consortium of almost 800 colleges and universities, research organizations, statistical agencies, and private companies. These broad academic-government collaborations facilitate access, transparency, and trust.     4   4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking (See: www.cep.gov) recommended the creation of a National Secure Data Service (See Commission Report at www.cep.gov). Do you agree with this recommendation, and if so, what should be the essential features of a National Secure Data Service?  If an NSDS is created along the lines recommended in the report, in which data are linked but then not kept so as to avoid the creation of a data warehouse that might impinge on privacy, linked data should be archived in the FSRDCs so that they can be accessed for reproducibility and the improvement of data linkage practices. While linkage methodologies are not the most exciting subject, they can have serious consequences for evidence-building and program administration (as suggested in the discussion of the fiasco that resulted for thousands of Michiganders when the State of Michigan used a low-quality deduplication algorithm with no transparency). For example, if analysts prioritize increasing a match rate, they may also generate many false positives. This will bias downward the estimates of the effects of any treatment or policy. Alternatively, if researchers throw away “non-matches” or individuals that cannot be uniquely matched to others, they may create datasets in which people from ethnicities with fewer distinct names are underrepresented. This is true of Hispanic and Korean names. Inference from analyses of data that exclude or underrepresent groups is likely to be biased and inequitable. It is therefore imperative that there be transparency and reproducibility with respect to linkages of datasets conducted by the NSDS. This will allow linkage procedures to be examined and improved; it will also create conditions for trust in any analysis of linked data.  5. How can federal agencies protect individual and organizational privacy when using data for evidence building? Recommend specific actions the Office of Management and Budget and/or other federal agencies can take when using data for evidence building, as well as suggested changes to federal laws, policies, and procedures.  The federal statistical community should be commended for the lack of breaches to privacy and confidentiality across its system. Across multiple agencies, data collections, and modes of access to vast amounts of data, there have been no cases in which individual identifying information has been made public or used in ways that undermine privacy by analysts or evidence-builders. The potential for confidentiality breaches exists, and the ease at which such breaches might occur has increased as a result of the increased availability of information about individuals and increased computational power. But the real threats to the privacy of Americans have come from policy decisions to use statistical data inappropriately, not from access by analysts or from the production of public use data products. The procedures that the statistical agencies have in place for producing safe data have been effective. They require ongoing modernization, given increased risks, but increased protection must be weighed against the degradation of the utility of the data. It is critical to have policies and laws that enforce firewalls between data used for statistical and evidence-building purposes and data used for enforcement and implementation of laws and policies. It is critical that there be transparency around statistical products that are used for high-powered decision making, including the allocation of dollars and political power.    6. If created, how should a data service be structured to best facilitate (1) research and development of secure data access and confidentiality technologies and methods, (2) and agency adoption of those technologies and techniques?  If an NSDS is created, it should be organized in a manner that brings our principal statistical agencies closer together, rather than increasing fragmentation. Collaboration will improve efficiency and increase data quality, particularly when it comes to creating measurement and inference from diverse types of organic data.     5   7. Government agencies have argued that secure data access has value because it (1) improves service delivery, (2) improves efficiency (lowers costs), (3) produces metrics for performance measurement, and (4) produces new learnings/insights from the data. Which of these propositions do you agree holds value and why? Do you have examples that demonstrate these benefits? Do you have other examples of the value of secure data access?  The thousands of scientific publications that have resulted from researchers who have accessed non-public data from NACJD (BJS) and the FSRDCs (Census, NCHS, AHRQ, BEA, BLS, NCSES) have provided the basis for improved understanding of policies around criminal justice, employment and economic growth, health, poverty, and more. Almost everything we know about how to improve health care delivery and organization is the result of analyses of data from NCHS, AHRQ, and CMS (Medicare and Medicaid). Our understanding of inequality and the relationship between local policies and the intergenerational transmission of poverty and inequality has been transformed by the work of the researchers at Opportunity Insights.  Our understanding of the determinants of economic dynamism and productivity growth has been transformed by the collaborative efforts of John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Lucia Foster, and others inside and outside the federal statistical system.   Collaborations between academic and federal researchers in the FSRDC network have led to the creation of new data products that inform employment and workforce development policy (e.g., Quarterly Workforce Indicators, Job to Job Flows, and On the Map), science and education policy (e.g., IRIS), and economic policy (e.g., MOPS, Opportunity Insights).  8. What are the most pressing data needs of state and local decision makers and how would making data accessible from federal agencies help meet those needs? To share data, what guarantees do data owners (or data controllers) need regarding privacy, data stewardship, and retention?  State and local decision-makers benefit when they (or their analysts) can access federal data that allows them to examine the impact of their policies on people or organizations that move across state borders. For example, state universities trying to measure the impact of the educational opportunities they offer want to be able to examine both those students who remain in the state after graduation and those that migrate out of state. States also need to place their policies in the context of those implemented in other states (e.g., Medicaid expansion might have very different implications for states if bordering states adopted different policies).  Very generally, one of the benefits of our federal system is that we have fifty ongoing experiments in social, economic, environmental, health, etc. policy.  We can only learn from them if we have consistent and integrated measurement.   Federal policy can facilitate the data sharing necessary for such analysis in several ways. Policies that build trust between the state and federal government are critical, as are policies that build capacity at the state level. When there has not been sufficient investment in state capacity, data sharing is more expensive and the resulting data lower quality. The establishment at the federal level of standardized metadata would facilitate data sharing, and would limit the ability of private organizations to impede data sharing for private gain.  9. What are the key problems and use cases where collaborative work between federal, state, and local authorities' data analysis can inform decisions? What are key decision support tools? How would greater communication about data and tools benefit expanded evidence building?  Collaborative work between federal, state, and local authorities could improve evidence base for and policies addressing everything from criminal justice to poverty to education to health to    6   climate to jobs.  There are a number of data resources that states regularly use that have limited usefulness because of the mobility of the US population. Datasets that draw on state data resources to create national data resources improve estimates of the impact of policies on inter-state migrants and would be very helpful for both local, state, and federal policy makers.  10. What basic public data services are essential for a data service to address existing capacity gaps and needs? What infrastructure or incentives can the federal government create that locals and states cannot?  The federal government can both invest in capacity building at the state and local level and use its investments at the federal level to reduce the burden on state and local governments. In doing so, it will increase the efficiency and the quality of data resources. For example, if the federal government provided consistent technology and technological support and standards that states could coalesce to state vital statistics departments and the health institutions (e.g., hospitals, nursing homes, prisons) that report to them, we could have high quality and timely national data on deaths from COVID or maternal mortality with important covariates such as race and occupation. Instead, we face national health crises with information we know is flawed, and must make decisions based on that flawed data.  We can do better.   Sincerely,   Margaret C. Levenstein ICPSR Director       