 From: Ross, Steven (ESD)To: EvidenceCc: Aviles, Gustavo (ESD); Zeitlin, Daniel (ESD); Feek, Cami (ESD)Subject: Feedback - Document Number: 2020-27489.Date: Tuesday, February 9, 2021 5:52:35 PM Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building Document Citation:85 FR 81179 ;  Page: 81179-81180 (2 pages) and Document Number: 2020-27489. Round 1 CENTRAL QUESTIONS— 1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments thatare trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based decision-making process.Misalignment in legislation and guidelines: While requiring a rigorous evaluation to build evidence, there is often insufficient supportfrom federal legislation for ensuring conditions for such evaluations.For example, while U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL) recommends a randomizedcontrolled trial (RCT) as a “approved/rigorous” method through “Causal EvidenceGuidelines, Version 2.1” for evaluating Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessment(RESEA) program, there are many requirements that make implementation of RCT verydifficult, such as requirement of service provision to population selected by WorkerProfiling and Reemployment Services (WPRS) profiling model.Also, while requiring states to conduct a net impact evaluation with the goal of creatingevidence with a specific timeline, new performance measurements are introduced in themiddle of evaluation phase.On a related note, by associating funding allotment condition with the proven level ofefficacy of a program, legislation can unintentionally put pressure on evaluators or programadministrators to “find” evidence hindering independent and unbiased evaluation. Interdisciplinary nature of the work and lack of coordination:Evidence-building activities often require an interdisciplinary collaboration that requires alot of coordinating efforts, e.g., evaluating a specific program takes expertise of theprogram under evaluation, IT knowledge on database and case management applications,statistics and econometrics. While it seems common at the federal government level tohave a centralized coordinator who disseminates evidence-based policy making practicesuch as an “evaluation office”, such level of coordination or support to create one islacking at the state and local government level. There seems to be a significant time lag inthe proliferation of the evidence-based policy making process as a culture.In Washington State, we have faced the problem of educating executives and managers ofthe meaning and implications of an evidence-based decision-making process, includingunderstanding the definition of impact evaluations, performance measures and theirrelation within the evidence-based decision-making process. Lack of database designed to support evidence building:Existing administrative databases are mainly designed to support public facing casemanagement applications or to support producing federally or state required reports(mostly performance or grant reports) but rarely designed to support net impact analyses. For that reason, researchers often don’t have access to data they need. E.g., some data are“replaced” by new data elements without archiving the data being replaced because the oldvalues are no longer needed from a non-research perspective.  Similarly, data dictionaries, if available at all, are typically written in a way to help specific   but non-evaluation tasks.To create a repository of relevant information for analysts, we suggest that the Departmentof Commerce (DOC) play additional emphasis on conducting randomized controlled trialsto collect experimental data. The DOC can follow the USDOL in providing guidelines forcausal inference, or adopt the USDOL’s. They can provide a similar clearing house toaggregate evidence and draw conclusions based on many studies of the same program. Data acquisition and reporting challenges include:Within Washington state - In order to bring data together  from multiple agencies for an evaluation, or even forfederal reporting, it is currently necessary for multiple agency IT and reporting teamsto coordinate on defining data needs, physically extracting the data to file, physicallytransmitting the file to the target agency, reuploading the data, using the data, anddestroying the data in accordance with retention requirements. This extract /transport/ upload/ destroy process extends reporting and research timelines whilecreating numerous potential points of failure, including potential for security breach. For this reason, each data share is preceded by a slow customized data sharingagreement/ contracting process to establish strict legal guidelines foraccessing, viewing, handling, storing, and destroying data. Across agencies (and even within agencies), data definitions and identifiers may notbe well aligned even within the same business domain. For example, systems withemployer data do not consistently require any common identifier that easily enablescrossmatch in later reporting. Across multiple states –Here in Washington state, workforce development areas that border other statesstruggle with incomplete data because their customers frequently cross the borderfor work or training opportunities. Program administration in these areas woulddirectly benefit from easier access to out-of-state data, and state level reporting andevaluations could use these data to fill in troubling analysis gaps. Limited data sharingdoes exist, but data is typically not accessible to all the types of reporting that couldbenefit. Federal-state coordination –Washington state has encountered communication challenges with federal and stateagencies over data changes (e.g., significant format or validation changes with littlenotice from federal agencies). This technical hurdle can add to the timeline for, orreduce the quality of, reports and evaluations.Some federal data, such as SWIS data, can be requested for evaluations. However,current limits on available data (e.g., most recent 2 years) limit the usefulness of datafor evaluations and research. 2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making thatsuccessfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?Any net impact study that used a rigorous causal inference methodology, underwent and passed arigorous peer review process, and found an impact that is statistically meaningful are goodexamples. Of these studies, those that use experimental data (e.g., randomized control trials (RCT))are considered the best type for evidence-based policy – gold standard for evaluation studies.Some examples are the studies that evaluated the Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR); theAbt Associates’ net impact study of Reemployment Eligibility Assessment using an RCT (experimentaldata); and the 2011 analysis of Nevada’s Reemployment Services and Assessment (REA). The last twostudies evaluating the REA program provided evidence that the REA program reducedunemployment insurance claim duration and improved employment outcomes. Both studies used anRCT to collect experimental data. The Nevada study is cited by the USDOL as a reason for prioritizingimplementation of this program across the country. Furthermore, starting in 2023, states mustallocate funding to RESEA programs that are supported by causal evidence and found to be   effective.   3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challengesexperienced by governments in their evidence building?The Department of Labor has established a very promising framework for supporting states as theyevaluate their Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessment (RESEA) programs. In addition tothe causal evidence guidelines they have provided, they provide funding to states to conduct theirevaluations (e.g., “Causal Evidence Guidelines, Version 2.1” stored on the Clearinghouse for LaborEvaluation and Research (CLEAR)). They also assess the quality of the studies and organize a researchrepository where many analyses of the same program are collected and analyzed together. Manystudies can provide stronger evidence of a program’s effectiveness. There guidelines, fundingpractices, and research aggregation services provide a context where evaluation efforts cansuccessfully build evidence of program effectiveness.Few improvements on them could be to elevate the Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD) methodto a “high” rated causal inference method, and provide more clarity on the criteria for reviewingevaluation studies and how states can implement the programs found to be effective. Evaluation,labor economic and other scientific journals provide an excellent framework of reference forreviewing studies (e.g., methods, data analysis results and conclusions). Any effort of trying to build abasis for evidence-based policy must also include a valid process for reviewing the studies.Cloud technologies show also promise in overcoming challenges. They will simplify data sharing bymaking it easier to merge and manipulate data cross-system data inside a cloud environment, whileenabling agencies to grant limited data access to approved external partners within the existingenvironment. This approach should reduce the need for analysts, researchers, or partners to physicallydownload data.In most cases, it should also speed and secure data sharing processes by eliminating theneed to physically move data.In cases where the need to physically move data has been eliminated, cloud technologieswill also have eliminated the reliance on third parties to destroy data in accordance withcontracted agreements. 4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking (See: www.cep.gov) recommended thecreation of a National Secure Data Service (See Commission Report at www.cep.gov). Do youagree with this recommendation, and if so, what should be the essential features of a NationalSecure Data Service?Yes, we agree. The biggest advantage of having such data service established from a statisticsperspective is to prevent net impact studies from finding biased results due to missing data problem.Local or state government in their studies evaluating their local workforce program frequently face asituation where they lose outcome data for program participants without knowledge of whetherthey are missing due to moving out of state or area of interest or being unemployed. Missing datacan occur randomly or non-randomly. If it occurs in a non-random way, a bias is introduced. Losingdata in a non-random sense is not uncommon, e.g., a computer coding training program in Idahocan produce incentives for the trainees to take a job in more tech-friendly states. Essential features include: Leverage federal data already collected (e.g., WIOA reporting, SWIS and BLS data), andshould avoid increasing the reporting burden on states to support the service.The service will need to provide simplified data formats designed to be accessible toresearchers who may not be data experts.   The service will need to use well -designed standard data encoding, with amplecommunication and reasonable timelines to implement changes.The service will need high-quality, searchable data definitions that can be easily connectedto the data.The service will need to provide clear guidance about permitted uses, download / accessrestrictions, and retention policies. 5. How can federal agencies protect individual and organizational privacy when using data forevidence building? Recommend specific actions the Office of Management and Budget and/orother federal agencies can take when using data for evidence building, as well as suggestedchanges to federal laws, policies, and procedures.No input at this time SECURE DATA ACCESS— 6. If created, how should a data service be structured to best facilitate (1) research anddevelopment of secure data access and confidentiality technologies and methods, (2) and agencyadoption of those technologies and techniques?It should be able to provide identifiers of study subject in a secure way. The ID may be encrypted butit must provide researchers the ability to crosswalk with other required information. And such datamust have well-written data dictionaries.Explore cloud technologies and infrastructure. New York University Coleridge Initiative may be a firststep example of structuring and securing data access.For agency adoption, it will require consistency and coordination of federal, state and localregulations, planning, upgrading and funding.   7. Government agencies have argued that secure data access has value because it (1) improvesservice delivery, (2) improves efficiency (lowers costs), (3) produces metrics for performancemeasurement, and (4) produces new learnings/insights from the data. Which of thesepropositions do you agree holds value and why? Do you have examples that demonstrate thesebenefits? Do you have other examples of the value of secure data access?The USDOL CLEAR (https://clear.dol.gov/) site holds several studies that include examples thatsupport propositions 1 through 4 and showcase the value of secure data access. DATA SERVICES TO FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL AGENCIES AND THE PUBLIC— 8. What are the most pressing data needs of state and local decision makers and how wouldmaking data accessible from federal agencies help meet those needs? To share data, whatguarantees do data owners (or data controllers) need regarding privacy, data stewardship, andretention?Data that can be used in causal inference analyses is the most pressing data need that must beaddressed to build evidence on program effectiveness. This can be experimental data, or data that isuseful for one or more quasi-experimental methods.Many evaluations and reports would benefit from easy access to other state data. (especially bordercities where missing data forms a substantial reporting gap; e.g., Spokane and Vancouver, WA). 9. What are the key problems and use cases where collaborative work between federal, state,   and local authorities' data analysis can inform decisions? What are key decision support tools?How would greater communication about data and tools benefit expanded evidence building?Monitoring economic cycles, healthcare problems (e.g., viral transmissions and available healthcareservices), estimating migrant and seasonal labor supply for seasonal labor demand (e.g., agriculturalspecialty crop activities (cherry and apple harvest)), estimating demand and supply of out-of-stateand foreign labor to meet local labor demand (e.g., agriculture, information technology andhealthcare). Also, evaluations of nationwide programs of policies administer at the state or local level requirelarge sample sizes to study effectively. When many states partner with each other, they can collectlarger quantities of data. These larger samples can be used to study a larger number of policies. INFRASTRUCTURE FOR MEETING PUBLIC AND EVIDENCE BUILDING NEEDS—10. What basic public data services are essential for a data service to address existing capacitygaps and needs? What infrastructure or incentives can the federal government create that localsand states cannot?The federal government could: Ease legal frameworks for sharing data between agencies and across state lines.Make interstate data available via a centralized reporting service Replace current data requests processes related to federal reporting requirement withthis service Make historical data available through this service (for example, SWIS wage data only goesback 2 years, which makes it data unusable for historical analyses)Implement reasonable retention policies for historical data – eg Directory of New Hiresdata can only be retained for 90 daysProvide a centralized repository of data tools/ services that are currently fragmented acrossmany federal agencies. These include common lookups and geodata (including politicalboundaries).Provide funding for evaluations.Provide guidance on what evaluation methods can be used for net impact studies ofprogram effectiveness and describing how the provided data can be used or has been usedin the past.Create a platform where evidence-building practices and their findings are shared in anaccessible way to all the states and local governments where all policy makers can learnfrom, and which can constitute a stronger body of evidence together.Create incentives for local and state researchers to participate in professional conferencesand expand their network with other field experts.  My best, Steven Ross | Director, Labor Market Information|| Labor Market and Economic Analysis || Desk 360.890.3736 || Mobile 360.480.0321 || sross@esd.wa.gov || Pronouns: He/Him/His |    