   [Docket ID—EAB-2021-0001-0001] Request for Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building Point of Contact Justin Baer, PhD Vice President, Program Evaluation and Policy Analysis jbaer@forsmarshgroup.com   Introduction Fors Marsh Group, LLC (FMG) is pleased to respond to the Request for Information from the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building. In the two years since the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 was signed into law, federal agencies have taken strides to adopt a culture of evidence-building. Below, we address three questions posed by the Committee (Questions 1, 2, and 3). Our perspective and recommendations are informed by FMG’s collaborations with multiple federal agencies on projects that aim to build, disseminate, and put evidence into practice to inform policy.    1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments that are trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based decision-making process.  While there are numerous challenges to evidence-based policymaking facing governments at every level, one of the biggest and most difficult to overcome is the wide variety of formats in which government data are stored and shared. This challenge exists across different levels of government – and even between different departments and agencies in a given jurisdiction. These varying data formats create a situation where the desire for an “apples to apples” comparison of data, often the basis for quality evidence-based policymaking, is usually frustrated by a “fruit salad” approach to data capture and storage nationwide. Some of this is due to the decentralized nature of American government, but it can also result from governments’ decisions about what vendors to use for data capture and storage, and reflect varying budgetary and legal constraints on what kind of data are collected and how they may be shared.  Lack of consistency between disparate data sources can force would-be evidence-based policymakers to expend time and energy harmonizing different data sets into one that can be used to analyze the desired question(s) at hand. That effort can involve tasks as simple as figuring out which data sets are storing numerical data as text or using different naming conventions for local or tribal jurisdictions – or require more difficult tasks like making value judgments or other key assumptions (calculating per capita rates or choosing a common year for Census estimates) to combine source data sets into one suitable for analysis.  Finally, even if this multi-jurisdictional data harmonization process works, once an evidence-based policymaking analysis is complete it is necessary to translate the results back into a format that can be used by participating jurisdictions. This not only involves a similar    Fors Marsh Group Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  2   translation process in the “other direction” – but it also requires careful and comprehensive documentation to ensure that the findings of any such analysis are both usable and meaningful for the participating government(s). This is the approach taken, for example, by the multi-state Electronic Registration Information Center to use participating states’ voter rolls and other data to identify both ineligible voters who have died or moved as well as eligible but unregistered individuals. States agree to use these latter data to proactively invite eligible individuals to register to vote – and so the data must successfully harmonize with the recipient state’s voter files.  Establishing a system to facilitate this harmonization – whether through reporting requirements, data standards, or even technical assistance to government agencies and their data vendors – is a crucial first step in building an evidence-based policymaking regime involving national, state/provincial, and local governments. We recommend that the Committee take steps to encourage and support efforts by governments at all level to develop and adopt data standards, common data definitions and other methods for allowing inter-governmental data sharing in support of evidence-based policymaking.  2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making that successfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?  Evidence-based policy making supported by interoperable systems that facilitate data exchange yields economic benefits and delivers enhancements to program administration and recipients. Examples of high-impact data usage can be found among many agencies, such as the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food and Nutrition Service (FNS). Through their data-driven approach, they strive to provide outcomes improvement for citizens and assist program administrators. For example, CMS has enacted the Health Information Technology for Economic Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), established as part of The American Recovery & Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA, or Recovery Act), which made it essential for electronic health records to be interoperable throughout the United States health care delivery system. 1 Furthermore, CMS initiatives like Promoting Interoperability Programs  (formerly known as the Medicare and Medicaid Electronic Health Records Incentive Programs) seeks to bolster patient electronic access to health care information, improve digital exchange of health information among payers, providers and patients, and continue to reduce payer and provider burden. 2    Much like CMS, the USDA FNS Office of Policy Support (OPS), has long implemented the use of high-impact data to conduct evidence-based analysis to achieve operational improvements, better understand food security, provide nutrition education, sustain participation rates, and ensure program integrity. Vital nutritional programs like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) have benefitted greatly through the development of an electronic benefit transfer (EBT) system, which created a national standard of interoperability established by the Electronic Benefit Transfer Interoperability and Portability Act of 2000 (P.L.   1 “Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Audits,” Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Aug. 2018. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Compliance-and-Audits/Part-A-Cost-Report-Audit-and-Reimbursement/HITECH-Audits 2 “Promoting Interoperability Programs,” Regulations and Guidance. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Jan 2021. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index    Fors Marsh Group Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  3   106-171), thus enhancing operation efficiency and effectiveness for both program administrators and recipients and led to a reduction of food stamp fraud. 3   While SNAP led EBT implementation early on, the WIC program followed suit and now provides digital benefits to participants as part of the Implementation of the Electronic Benefit Transfer-Related Provisions (P.L. 111-296) under the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, which mandated all WIC State Agencies implement EBT by Oct. 2, 2020, thus providing a safer, easier, and more efficient grocery experience and allows for greater flexibility in the way WIC participants can shop. 4 Agencies like USDA FNS and CMS have established systems of interoperability to collect and manage administrative data and support rigorous research to generate evidence through various methods, such as pilot testing and statistical modeling and analysis.  Structuring programs in a way that promotes evidence generation informs sound policy and reduces costs, such as the CMS Innovation Center, which tests payment and service delivery models to improve patient care and community health and lower healthcare costs, and the SNAP Online Purchasing Pilot, which is currently testing the feasibility of online SNAP purchases to allow households to make online purchases in a secure and easy to use manner. 5   We recommend that the Committee support program initiatives by expanding internal capacity-building efforts, evaluate technical assistance needs, and develop a framework for organizational learning to promote a culture of evaluative inquiry. We also recommend to the Committee to improve data standardization and establish interoperable systems accessible to stakeholders, conduct pilot studies, and adopt a tiered evidence approach to assess findings and assess outcomes.   3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challenges experience by governments in their evidence building?  Federal policymakers have a variety of tools at their disposal to promote evidence building. We focus on two examples with demonstrated success over the past decade in multiple agencies: 1) evidence repositories, and 2) tiered evidence grantmaking.   Evidence Repositories. Building an evidence base to effectively inform decision making involves surmounting two critical challenges – identifying where evidence exists that is relevant to the decisions at hand and what evidence is rigorous enough to consider credible. There is a deluge of information available and the methodological quality used to generate this information ranges from excellent to essentially non-existent. Thus, either challenge may seem insurmountable to decision makers if they do not have the right tools. Evidence repositories are one proven tool.   3 “A Short History of SNAP,” United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutritional Services. Sept. 2018. https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/short-history-snap#1992 4 “WIC: Implementation of the Electronic Benefit Transfer-Related Provisions of PL 111-296 - Final Rule,” United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutritional Services. Mar. 2016. https://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/special-supplemental-nutrition-program-women-infants-and-children-wic-implementation-electronic 5 “SNAP Online Purchasing Pilot,” United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutritional Services. Dec. 2020. https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/online-purchasing-pilot    Fors Marsh Group Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  4   Evidence repositories provide a pool of evidence to draw upon to inform decisions. These repositories are topically organized around outcomes, programs, and policies to facilitate use by decisionmakers. Evidence standards are used to ensure the findings included in evidence repositories are credible. Evidence repositories often use evidence standards ratings that indicate the confidence in the research. Research that meets minimal evidence standards would be assigned rating that indicates the research design was less rigorous, whereas more rigorous research (e.g., a well-conducted randomized controlled trial) would receive a rating that reflects a higher tier of confidence.  For increased usability, research in evidence repositories is often presented in products specifically designed to bridge the gap between research and practice. For example, meta-analytic statistical techniques may be used to synthesize findings on a policy’s impact on an outcome of interest across multiple studies and present one estimate of the policy’s impact to the reader. This estimate may be translated to a categorical indication of effectiveness – for example, a policy may be “not effective,” “promising,” or “effective.” In addition, evidence repository products can be made more accessible to broad audiences by making them short in length and using plain language accompanied by visuals to communicate complex research findings. Examples of evidence repositories include the Department of Education’s What Works Clearinghouse, Department of Labor’s Clearinghouse for Labor Evaluation and Research, and Department of Justice’s Crime Solutions.       Tiered Evidence Grantmaking. Tiered evidence grants allocate funds based on the strength of evidence for the program or approach proposed by a grantee. Programs with stronger evidence are awarded larger amounts and those with lesser evidence are awarded smaller amounts. Tiered evidence grantmaking allows agencies to invest in those programs that are most likely to yield results (because these programs have a body of evidence to support them) while still encouraging innovation and experimentation. This also mitigates risk, as agencies are not locked into allocating grants to programs with weak evidence to support them.  Under tiered evidence grantmaking, applicants must demonstrate evidence of effectiveness as part of their grant applications and conduct an evaluation of their program if they receive an award. Grant recipients are expected to participate in evaluations that generate high-quality evidence, often via a third-party research organization, on the effectiveness of the funded program. A high-quality evaluation is operationalized as being conducted independently, meeting certain design criteria that deem the findings credible, and examining outcomes that are reliable and meaningful.   Federal agencies that adopt tiered evidence grantmaking may support grantees by offering evaluation technical assistance on research design and the standardization of meaningful outcomes. This technical assistance increases the likelihood that evidence generated across grantees will be comparable and therefore useful in making future funding decisions across different state and local settings. Moreover, program evaluation is particularly important because it contributes to the evidence base about effective programs. Funding agencies should draw on this evidence for future grantmaking and, if an evidence repository has been established, completed program evaluations should be recorded for use by other grantees and the field at large.    Fors Marsh Group Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building  5   Tiered evidence grantmaking has most frequently been applied to discretionary grant programs (e.g., ED’s Education Innovation and Research competition), though not exclusively. The Title V Maternal and Child Health Services program administered by the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA) is a formula grant program that adopted a tiered evidence model in 2015.  The success of these programs over the past decade across agencies – ED, CNCS, DOL, and HHS – suggests that they may be expanded elsewhere in the federal government.   We recommend that the Committee develop guidance and advocate for the expansion of evidence repositories and tiered evidence grantmaking across the federal government. This could include raising awareness through FAQs, webinars, and professional learning communities. The Committee could also provide technical assistance on the steps for building repositories and implementing tiered evidence grantmaking, drawing on examples from some of the agencies noted above. Importantly, the Committee should aim to be inclusive when developing guidance or standards, recognizing that the body of evidence in some fields is not as mature as in others. Thus, while randomized controlled trials may be the “gold standard” and applicable to some agencies, the state of evidence building at other agencies may be more formative. Regardless of the stage of maturity, creating repositories and implementing tiered evidence grantmaking will equip policymakers with stronger evidence to guide decision-making.  