 “Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building’  Robert Goerge, Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago  February 9, 2021   1. What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or local governments that are trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy? Briefly describe the  bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based decision-making process.  A culture of evidence-building in federal, state and local government is nearly totally absent.  These  agencies are, in most cases, the source of data by which to produce evidence. Researchers getting  access to data that can be used for evidence-building is the major barrier to building a basis for  evidence-based policy.  Government agencies are typically resistant to having their programs or  policies evaluated because there is typically no tangible benefit to the agency.  All government  agencies, by rule, avoid risks.  Providing data to organizations or individuals that can create evidence  about their programs may not produce results that show the agency’s program is effective.  Agency  leaders risk criticism or termination as a result of negative results of an evaluation.    In addition, there are many special interests that advocate for government agencies NOT supporting  activities that create evidence.  Evidence can support or threaten a special interest, but most do not  see the benefit of taking the risk of showing a program is ineffective.   Private organizations that  subcontract for the provision of government services and labor unions may not benefit from  evidence that shows that services don’t work.  Evidence-building needs to be a permanent, ongoing activity.   There is so little fidelity to any  particular type of intervention (other than providing direct transfers) that each replication is a unique  intervention.  In addition, programs are constantly experiencing changes in context, external  conditions, population need and personnel that rigorous evaluation should be an ongoing activity of  every government agency.    Doing many RCTs would be ideal, but rigorous non-experimental evaluations can also contribute to  the evidence-base.  A place to start would simply be focusing on the outcomes of programs in order  to create a culture of evidence-building at all levels of government.    See Goerge RM. Barriers to Accessing State Data and Approaches to Addressing Them. The  ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 2018;675(1):122-137.  doi:10.1177/0002716217741257  2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policy making that successfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of citizens?  Courtney, Mark., & Dworsky, Amy. (2006). Short-term outcomes for young adults transitioning from out-of-home care in the U.S. Child and Family Social Work, 11, 209-219.Dworsky, A. (2005). Self-sufficiency of Wisconsin’s former foster youth. Children and Youth Services Review, 27, 1085-1118.    This is one citation for work done by Courtney and Dworsky.  It is an example of the investigators working with state agencies to implement new policies and programs, evaluate the programs and then work to improve them.  3. Which frameworks, policies, practices, or methods show promise in overcoming challenges experienced by governments in their evidence building?  Government agencies must be required to build evidence and constantly evaluate their programs.  A  portion of each programmatic budget should go to formal evaluation.  There should be major  incentives for agencies to evaluate their program and penalties for agencies that do not have recent  evaluations of their programs.  They should be required to employ or contract with qualified  researchers.  External peer review of proposals should be put in place with every agency.  There  must be special circumstances to not evaluate program, rather than, as it is currently, being a special  circumstance when a rigorous evaluation does occur.  4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking (See: www.cep.gov) recommended  the creation of a National Secure Data Service (See Commission Report at www.cep.gov).  Do you agree with this recommendation, and if so, what should be the essential features of a  National Secure Data Service?   No, I do not agree with this recommendation.  The primary obstacle to building evidence is  providing data to qualified researchers in a timely manner. Secure clearinghouses or  archives with up to date data should be established.  These clearinghouses should contain  curated datasets with permitted uses that do not require additional sign off for use. Other than    convincing an agency to do an RCT, the most difficult part of evidence-building using administrative  data is getting access and permission to use the data.  If the data is not already available and  permission is not already in place, it can take years to implement an evidence-building effort. This is  what needs to be streamlined, not the technical issues of extracting data and getting it linked.   If an investigator has data from a study population that he or she has collected through any means,  he or she should be able to upload the data to a secure site where 1) important datasets (listed  below) already exist, 2) with sufficient metadata to guide the investigator, and 3) with documentation  and established code that previous investigators have used.  If proper security protections are in  place (that protect identities), there should a trivial permissions process.  All of this should be  available to a credible researcher who is building evidence.  The linkage should be trivial since the  necessary identifiers or the path to linking through other means either does or does not exist.  The  NSDS, as I understand it, would not have 1 or 3 above.   The Census Bureau already has an adequate capacity to do the technical aspects of creating datasets  and providing secure access, but the primary problem is that they do not have the ability to access  data necessary to build evidence.  SSA, SSI, IRS, SNAP, UI (NDNH), WIC, Medicaid, K-12  education, post-secondary education, and CCDF are programs where the datasets are difficult to  access because of legal restrictions, not technical ones.  There may be restrictions around sharing  (SSA) or specifically sharing for research purposes (SNAP and WIC, IRS).  There may be problems  because sufficient linking variables are not collected at the federal level even if collected by states.   There are other restrictions at the state level—variable across states (UI, Medicaid).  And, the federal  government is not even allowed to maintain education datasets, but Census can IF the data holders  agree.  Recommendations 2-5, 2-6, and 2-7 of the CEP report speaks to these issues.   Having done an IPA at the Census Bureau’s CARRA and having done other major projects linking  investigator-supplied state or local datasets to federal datasets, I am convinced that the barriers are  legal and organizational.  Legal ones needs to be address by Congress.  Organizational ones primarily  have to deal with their being unclear governance procedures or too many individuals in positions of  authority who can say “No” to a project for any idiosyncratic reason. Perhaps, Recommendation 2-8  speaks to this issue.     Since access to data is the biggest obstacle to building evidence, the argument that a NSDS would  address an obstacle that is preventing evidence building  is unclear.  Protecting privacy, the biggest  argument for an NSDS, is not that difficult and has already been demonstrated in multiple places.    If the primary activity is to provide a linking service to researchers, it would be creating something  that is really not necessary.  Multiple organizations should house data that can be used to create  evidence in an ongoing way.   Finally, the NSDS should not be in a Federal agency (Rec.. 4-1).  It should sit in a private  organization with Federal oversight and funding.  It should not be managed by one government  entity that can control the data.  It should be a partnership among local, state and federal  agencies, along with private sector data producers.   See two examples under question 5 below that further describe my vision of a NSDS.   4. How can federal agencies protect individual and organizational privacy when using data for evidence building? Recommend specific actions the Office of Management and  Budget and/or other federal agencies can take when using data for evidence building, as  well as suggested changes to federal laws, policies, and procedures.  Procedures and policies have already been developed and simply need to be enforced.  Have there  been major breaches in research environments?  The 5 Safes already provide a framework.  Practices  used in the FSRDCs, in the Coleridge Initiative ADRF, and in other archives already protect  individual and organizational privacy.   Privacy protection is a red herring used to prevent the  building of evidence.  5. If created, how should a data service be structured to best facilitate (1) research and development of secure data access and confidentiality technologies and methods, (2) and  agency adoption of those technologies and techniques?  A data service that houses important datasets (employment, tax, health, disability, nutrition, income  maintenance, education, employment and training) that are ready to access with a simple application.    Two examples may better delineate what I am suggesting.  Example 1.  University or research organization investigator  An investigator has implemented an RCT which tests how families benefit from different  interventions designed to increase the nutrition of their food intake.  This may lead to actual better  nutrition or accessing benefits and services that provide resources to purchase food.  The research  has an approved protocol through an Institutional Review Board to project human subjects.  Adults  have provided consent to link to a specific set of administrative records—SNAP, WIC, UI data and  IRS tax data.  The investigator should be able to send his dataset with the proper protections in the proper format  with the necessary identifiers to a clearinghouse.  This data should be linked to national SNAP,  WIC, UI and IRS data and a deidentified dataset should be made available to that investigator within  days so the investigator has the full history of these data for all of the study families.  These data  should remain in a secure facility and any data exported from it should go through a thorough  disclosure review consistent with the IRB protocol.  Example 2  A state agency has implemented a new work requirement for a systematic sample of program  participants.  This state agency should be able to submit a dataset with information from these  program participants to gather information on their SSA, SSI, SNAP, UI benefit and wage, TANF,  and CCDF program participation and be able to determine whether their new work requirement has  a positive impact one earnings, social program participation, and work support utilization on the  sample of program participants.  These data should also be maintained in a secure facility.  Given  that the participants are state program participants, state policy should determine how the data on  these participants can be used.   8. What are the most pressing data needs of state and local decision makers and how would  making data accessible from federal agencies help meet those needs? To share data, what    guarantees do data owners (or data controllers) need regarding privacy, data stewardship,  and retention?  The primary obstacle to building evidence is providing permission to qualified researchers  to access data.  In most cases, state and local decision-makers require data from across government  agencies.  Programs and data are in silos that prevent the combining of data on program provision  and outcomes of those programs.  Employment data is the best example and employment data from  any agency is incomplete.  The accurately build evidence on human capital building programs  (education, job training…), data from state and federal agencies (like that in NDNH plus IRS data)  is necessary.  Data on these human capital programs (education and training) are held or control by  the same agencies that collect employment data.  And, multi-state employment data is necessary  because in many cases employers are out-of-state or employees do not always work in states in  which they reside.  10. What basic public data services are essential for a data service to address existing  capacity gaps and needs? What infrastructure or incentives can the federal government  create that locals and states cannot?  The federal government can provide funding, but it is unable to adequately operate a data service  that can efficiently contribute to evidence-building.  Trust in the federal government, primarily by  state and local government leaders, as well as the sluggishness in the federal government (or any  level of government) getting things done, make them a poor implementer of public data services.   Many states and localities would prefer not to send their data to the federal government, where they  lose access and control and don’t know what is being done with data that they have collected.  It’s  understood that much state and local data is collected using funding from by the federal  government, but the state and local governments feel exert stewardship over these data and know  that they are a tool to determine penalties and action against them.  In addition, federal government  has not been effective, to date, in producing datasets and providing access that support evidence- building, in part, because they are ineffective in getting local, state and federal agencies to support  research and evaluation.  Only a few states have created a culture where evidence is valued.  When  the federal government puts out announcements for data-building opportunities, most states do not  apply.      Any national (not federal) data service needs to be a partnership among federal, state and local  government agencies, and private organizations that maintain data sets important for evidence- building, such as the National Student Clearinghouse.   