 From: Jacob PlummerTo: EvidenceSubject: Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence BuildingDate: Tuesday, February 9, 2021 11:27:37 PM Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence BuildingDocket ID—EAB-2021-0001-0001 February 9th, 2021 To: The Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building We are pleased to provide comments in response to Question #9 of the 10 questions posed in the Federal Register. Question #9 reads: “9. What are the key problems and use cases where collaborative work between federal, state, and local authorities’ data analysis can inform decisions? What arekey decision support tools? How would greater communication about data andtools benefit expanded evidence building?” To provide context on our comments, we answered this question based on our first-hand knowledge in working with privacy-preserving record linkage technology.  Datavant is the leader in privacy preserving data exchange, working with over 300 institutions to connect health data. Our mission is to connect the world’s health data to improve patient outcomes and bring new treatments to patients faster. We believe that data fragmentation is the largest challenge facing the health data industry, and we are focused on building an open data ecosystem that allows players in the healthcare system to freely exchange data while protecting patient privacy. To accomplish this, we partner with companies, non-profits, and government entities that utilize our common infrastructure for the safe exchange of patient-level health information. Key Problems and Use CasesWe have observed many benefits to population health that come from being able to link datasets together. We provide for illustration our public listing of peer-reviewed research papers done, many that have involved data sets from governmental agencies at the state and federal level (e.g. Veterans Administration data, Housing & Urban Development data, State Mortality record data, etc.) at this online address: https://datavant.com/datavant-research-portfolio/ We also identify two use case examples here: Privacy Preserving Record LInkage can improve medical care available to patients through the creation of more accurate risk scores by combining governmental and private sector data sources. By linking together registry data, state vital (mortality) data, and public and private hospital data, researchers were    able to improve the risk scores used to identify patients needing liver transplants.  Source: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31644488/ Privacy Preserving Record LInkage enables government agencies to have new insights into populations under their care. Datavant has been used in several Veterans Administration projects to understand healthcare utilization patterns and services for Veterans that sought care in VA vs. non-VA facilities in the private sector, and to identify vulnerable Veteran populations such as homeless Veterans, or those at risk of becoming homeless Source 1) Health Care Utilization Among Homeless Veterans in Chicago. Military Medicine, Volume 185, Issue 3-4, March-April 2020, Pages e335–e339, https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usz264  Source 2) Health Care Utilization Among Homeless Veterans in Chicago. Military Medicine, Volume 185, Issue 3-4, March-April 2020, Pages e335–e339, https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usz264 What are Key Decision Support Tools?1.  From our experience helping researchers design their research studies, we believe it is critical for researchers to have a Privacy-Preserving Record Locator Service that can determine which datasets hold data on the same patients.  Such a tool allows researchers to determine which datasets will be most valuable for their research, before the time and expense comes of bringing those data sets together. This is even more useful when the datasets being assessed are held by different governmental jurisdictions, or even are held by non-governmental agencies.   How would greater communication about data and tools benefit expanded evidence building? We believe the use of data to expand evidence building will grow the most when the following five criteria are met, all of which have the greatest chance of being met with Data Holders are aware of what tools exist to reliably de-identify, link, and track the data in question. 1. Data Availability:   a. To maximize evidence building, all available data would eventually become available through the National Secure Data Service. However, this will only happen if data holders learn about the existence of tools that enable their data to be de-identified and joined with other data sources. 2. Data Relevance: a. Data sets are most useful when they are paired with datasets that hold information on the same people. If data holders understand there are tools that enable a standard record linkage methodology, and that it is possible to quickly identify which datasets hold information on the same people, (before those data sets are brought together) then it will increase the likelihood that when data is joined, it will result in new insights. The success of bringing data sets together will drive increased demand to use privacy-preserving record linkage tools to generate new evidence and insights. 3. Data Reliability: a. Data sets are prone to error, sometimes inadvertent error. As an example, a coroner may accurately report a person’s cause of death on a death certificate, but inaccurately record a patient’s ethnicity, or leave such information blank, unsure of what the correct ethnicity is. Through privacy-preserving record linkage, other data sets holding information on the same individual (e.g. survey data sets) that recorded a person’s attestation of their ethnicity, can be used to improve the accuracy of the mortality record. 4. Low Data Latency a. The COVID-19 pandemic illustrated that some public health needs require data that has just been generated in the last few days, or week, or month. If private sector organizations realize their data may have utility for government and public health professionals, they may install privacy-preserving record-linkage technologies within their data systems, so that their low-latency data is available upon request by the government. In the last crisis, this could have    taken the form of airline data being immediately available in a privacy-preserving way to understand the spread of the COVID-19 virus.  5. Clear Use Rights a. Perhaps the greatest insight we have seen from working with Data Holders is the importance of strong governance controls. Organizations may wish to collaborate with another data partner for one project, but not another. For example, a State may wish to share data on that state’s citizens to support a public health use case, but not an immigration-related use case. If organizations understand that there are technologies that enable the continued downstream control of their data, so that the data can only be linked with other data sets they have authorized, and for use cases they have authorized, there is a greater likelihood that they will make their data available, and that the public will trust that data is being used with appropriate oversight. Without this understanding, it is less likely the organization will approve its data to be used for evidence-building. We hope these comments are helpful to this important initiative. Sincerely, Jake PlummerHead of Customer Success, Datavant, Inc.jake@datavant.com --Jake PlummerHead of Customer Success, Datavantjake@datavant.com | 312-730-4595 Calendar Link 