   Docket Number: EAB-2021-0001  Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building:   State Chief Data Officers Recommendations for Federal Data Sharing Improvements  We are the 27 ​state Chief Data Officers​ representing approximately 72 percent of the United States population. We represent some of the largest populous states like California, Texas, and Florida and smaller states such as Wyoming, Vermont, and Alaska.  State governments are charged with implementing Medicaid, SNAP, TANF, amounting to many of the largest federal programs. COVID-19 has put unprecedented strain on state governments. States face significant challenges in collecting, integrating, and reporting COVID-related data, and these challenges are just a microcosm of the issues states face everyday.   Without improvements to federal data sharing infrastructure, states' ability to recover effectively will be hampered. ​Federal agencies must deliver big, bold solutions that allow states to more effectively leverage data to deliver services, and raise the bar for managing and protecting citizens’ data.   While legislation like the OPEN Government Data Act of 2017 and Foundations for Evidence-based Policymaking Act of 2018 have set national precedents for data-driven governments, states still struggle to navigate the use of federal data and data about federal programs due to the complexity of the existing system of regulatory and administrative procedures. We have laid out a proposed course of action that would reduce states’ barriers to data use. Privacy and data protection are also priorities for our governments, so our proposal includes recommendations to preserve or improve existing data privacy protections.    1. Simplify federal agencies’ legal and regulatory frameworks to allow state and local governments to more easily share and report data.    To simplify data sharing and reporting, the Administration should:     ● Streamline​ ​and harmonize complicated and often contradictory federal laws to allow for more data sharing across the state-administered federal programs. States need to share data across subject matter domains (education, health, financial, etc) to enable coordinated and efficient service delivery;  ● Provide legal clarity for data sharing across multiple domains and domain-specific bodies of law. While policy-specific guidance (regarding FERPA, HIPAA, HMIS, CJIS, etc.) is helpful, the lack of legal clarity around data-sharing across these domains leads to different legal interpretations across states. The Administration for Children & Families released a helpful Toolkit​ for sharing data across six programs, and more tools like this are necessary;  ● Partner with states to provide guidance as to the interaction between state and federal privacy requirements. State-specific statutes can further complicate the legal path towards integrated data. Developing model frameworks in partnership with states can reduce the local burden of interpretation;  ● Provide model data use agreements (DUAs) that take into account this enhanced legal clarity. Model DUA terms, which build on the prior two recommendations, could accelerate adoption among agencies;  ● Streamline and harmonize redundant data reporting requirements for state agencies receiving federal funding that reduce duplicate reporting efforts, focus on outcomes, shift toward more trust-based models, and maintain both effectiveness and efficiency;  ● Establish a National Data Commissioner, similar to ​Australia’s​, to promote greater use of public sector data and support simpler data sharing frameworks;  ● Explore the utility of a single data protection law for the public sector, leveraging insights from implementation of the EU’s GDPR.   2. Provide funding and guidance to strengthen use of data in policy-making.  To strengthen data use, the Administration should:    ● Provide policy directives that directly fund and mandate states to incubate and grow centers of excellence for  data and evidence-based policy and improved service delivery, including use of randomized control trials, behavioral economics, and advanced analytics and machine learning;  ● Authorize and incent states to leverage a small percentage of each federal grant to build the capacity and establish the infrastructure necessary to share, integrate, and analyze data related to federal programs;    ● Fund model implementations and centers for integrated, longitudinal data systems, including regional models, in contrast to state-centric funding models;  ● Establish the ​National Secure Data Service​, as recommended by the Commission for Evidence Based Policymaking, prioritize access for state governments.    3. Coordinate with state CDOs   To improve coordination, the Administration should:    ● Coordinate federal data acquisitions, particularly those involving remote sensing data, with state CDOs and Geographic Information Officers.  ● Enhance coordination between state and federal CDOs by: ○ Conducting regular roundtables of the CDOs of major federal agencies  and state CDOs; ○ Coordinating with state CDOs prior to initiating data-centric initiatives  at the federal level, including those sponsored by the White House;  ○ Collaboratively identifying projects or use cases that would benefit from  state and federal data.   Contact Information: Tyler Kleykamp, Director State Chief Data Officers Network Beeck Center for Social Impact + Innovation Georgetown University Email  