  February 9, 2021  RE: ​Comments for the Advisory Committee on Data for Evidence Building in Response to the Request for Comments at 85 FR 81179  Dear Advisory Committee Members,   Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on how to improve the use of data for  evidence building.  The Data Foundation is a non-profit organization that seeks to improve government and society  by using data to inform public policymaking. Our 50-member Data Coalition Initiative operates  as America’s premier voice on data policy, advocating for responsible policies to make  government data high-quality, accessible, and usable. The Data Coalition’s members have been  strong advocates and supporters of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (P.L.  115-435), including the OPEN Government Data Act and the Confidential Information  Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act. Effective implementation of the statutory requirements  in the Evidence Act remains a critical priority for our country’s data infrastructure and  capabilities in coming years.    The following comments in response to the request from the Advisory Committee on Data for  Evidence Building (ACDEB) are high-level observations submitted on behalf of the members of  the Data Coalition. Given the breadth of the RFC from the committee, these comments are not  an exhaustive list of considerations or solutions. But the Data Coalition members hope these  comments will inform the committee’s fact-finding and formulation of recommendations this  year.   Question 1: What are the main challenges faced by national, state/provincial, or  local governments that are trying to build a basis for evidence-based policy?  Briefly describe the bottlenecks and pain-points they face in the evidence-based  decision-making process.    Many of the challenges faced by governments at all levels are not unique to the public sector and  are also experienced by private companies and research organizations as factors of institutional  arrangement. Therefore, there are also considerable lessons to be learned from  non-governmental entities relevant for responsibly and expeditiously addressing barriers and  pain-points for using data to inform decision-making. Key bottlenecks relevant for the Advisory  Committee’s work include:   ● Data Discoverability and Reusability. ​Traditional data collection can be expensive and difficult to do, particularly as alternative data sources and capabilities become more       prevalent. As researchers identify innovative approaches for using alternative datasets,  there is the possibility for new collaboration through secure, responsible sharing.  However,  the core challenge in this context is not one of sharing, but how data users  gain awareness of what datasets may already exist and be accessible to them for  particular purposes or uses. The lack of easily-discoverable and widely-available data can  prompt national, state, and local governments to undertake costly data collections for a  single purpose, and the same is true in the private sector. Improving data governance to  help jurisdictions discover and reuse existing data may remove substantial barriers to the  use of data for evidence-building.    The OPEN Government Data Act (Title 2 of the Foundations for Evidence-Based  Policymaking Act) specifically incorporates requirements for the federal government  agencies to establish data inventories with appropriate metadata. The importance of this  provision about data inventories in existing law cannot be overstated. Private companies  that have internally resolved data discoverability issues and research consortia  addressing reusability dynamics cannot solve these issues without well-designed,  comprehensive data inventories. Further, the most effective inventory strategies  incorporate assessments of data sensitivity, quality, and provide feedback loops for  improving data collection and management procedures over time. Prioritizing  implementation of this provision in federal law should be deemed a top tier issue, and  state and local governments should similarly adopt procedures to prioritize inventorying  as well.    How agencies publish their inventory is also relevant for the usefulness of any discovery  tool. Some federal agencies have elected to publish data inventories in CSV files, for  example. Manually creating an inventory in spreadsheets fails to adopt or apply solutions  that can more comprehensively and meaningfully facilitate data discovery among  internal agency staff, as well as the research community, private researchers, and the  American public. Fortunately, many private firms have developed low-cost solutions that  could be adopted without creating new custom-made approaches in government  agencies. ​The committee should minimally encourage agencies to engage in public-private partnerships to support rapid adoption, completion, and  updates to required federal data inventories.    ● Incentives for quality data reporting. ​The committee’s charge with considering the role of data in a federal context must acknowledge that much of the information provided to  and used by federal agencies is reported from state and local governments, contractors,  or grantees. Across the different programs and activities of government, the incentives  for reporting timely, high-quality, and accurate information vary. Some data systems still  operate with paper-based data collection and manual data entry, concepts that should  have become obsolete in government operations 20 years ago but nonetheless persist.  The incentive structures for reporting to, or even sharing with federal agencies in a more  cooperative manner requires the use of monetary or value-based incentives. For  example, private firms have experienced a greater aptitude for sharing when there is a  “business intelligence” use for the information that can inform supply capabilities or     production timelines. The government’s need for information must be calibrated to a  responsible expectation of what the information will be used for and, in turn, produce  products and insights that are meaningful and useful for other jurisdictions in an  intergovernmental context.    Minimally, ​the committee should encourage that federal agencies invest financially and with appropriate human capital in the resources needed to  support state and local governments in reporting high-quality, timely  information on priority programs and activities​.     2. What are examples of high-impact data uses for evidence-based policymaking  that successfully effected change, reduced costs, or improved the welfare of  citizens?   There are a great number of examples of federal, state, and local governments using data to  support evidence-based decisions. We encourage the committee to review resources like  Evidence Works​, which specifically offers case studies that will be relevant to this question.​1  There are of course many other examples.    One such example comes from SSDI. Researchers were able to estimate the prevalence, duration  and dollar amount of work-related overpayments accrued to Social Security Disability Insurance  beneficiaries through the use of administrative data from the Social Security Administration.  While overpayments among beneficiaries were rare overall, these overpayments accounted for  $831 million in FY 2010. The researchers used multiple administrative data sets within the  Social Security Administration, each of which captured different information necessary to  conduct the appropriate analysis. More information on this project and discussion of particular  data sets can be ​found here​.   The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking also identified multiple examples in its final  report.    Uses of evidence can be difficult to detect and may not correspond to  represent one-to-one  comparisons of a data claim or evidentiary conclusion and an observable action. This should not  deter the committee's work in prioritizing improved uses of data sharing and linking capabilities  that may contribute to long-term policy change, shifts in how policy actions are reviewed or  considered, or even an improved understanding of the current state of the world that may affect  problem definitions.     1 N. Hart and M. Yohannes. ​Evidence Works: Cases Where Evidence Meaningfully Informed Policy. ​Washington,  D.C.: Bipartisan Policy Center, 2019. Available at: ​https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3766880      4. The Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking recommended the creation of  a National Secure Data Service . Do you agree with this recommendation, and if so,  what should be the essential features of a National Secure Data Service?   The Data Coalition Initiative strongly supports the recommendation from the U.S. Commission  on Evidence-Based Policymaking for creating a National Secure Data Service. Such a data  service can improve coordination throughout the federal government’s decentralized data  infrastructure, and would improve our nation’s ability to generate timely and relevant  information needed for sound policymaking. The Data Coalition also recognizes that a single  data service may be unable to meet the demand for use based on current gaps in the existing  infrastructure and may also not satisfy all of the potential data linkage needs for a variety of  purposes and uses. However, it is reasonable to believe that the Evidence Commission’s  proposal for a National Secure Data Service is a sound starting point for improving the capacity  and capability of the government to address long-standing information deficits. Nonetheless, the  Data Coalition members also call on the committee and government to intentionally plan for  future data needs and uses for non-statistical and non-evidentiary purposes where similar data  linkage and sharing capabilities may be needed to address improper payments, fraud detection,  or other administrative matters of government.    For a data service as envisioned by the Evidence Commission in its final report, the Data  Coalition recognizes that the following characteristics are essential, though may not be the only  features vital to a successful data service:   ● Cross-functional data management​ -  The Evidence Commission recommended a data service for exclusively statistical purposes and activities, which may be reasonable for the  service envisioned here; other services or capabilities may also be needed for broader  purposes and uses.  The committee’s recommendations will need to specify particular  uses and purposes in the near-term. However, data users will recognize the benefits of a  data service for a multitude of reasons. The design of the service must account for a  range of perspectives and incorporate feedback from a wide variety of users and  contributors to ensure that the service is meeting diverse needs.   ● Standards and practices for data management​ - In order to ensure data are reliable and usable for researchers, there must be strong and clearly defined data management  standards, such as cataloguing conventions and metadata documentation. These  standards must also be reasonably enforced or be coupled with incentives for  compliance. The Chief Statistician of the United States in partnership with the Chief  Information Officer could support adoption of appropriate standards using authority  provided in the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995.   ● Accountability and oversight​ - A National Secure Data Service needs to be trusted by the public. In order to achieve that trust there need to be strong oversight and accountability  mechanisms. This should include cooperation and coordination with existing oversight  organizations such as the Government Accountability Office, congressional bodies and  relevant inspectors general. The committee might consider designating an existing or     new inspector general role for specifically overseeing government’s data linkage and  sharing capabilities as well as compliance with open data, data inventory, and data  quality mandates.    ● Transparency​ - Any data service must promote public trust by transparently and clearly explaining its policies and activities, including how confidential data are used. This can  be effectively accomplished through a searchable directory of ongoing and completed  projects. A key provision in this would be to have any decisions made by the data service  be both auditable and appealable, including how researchers are granted or denied  access to data.   ● Privacy and Confidentiality protections​ - A strong commitment to privacy and confidentiality must be foundational to a National Secure Data Service. Security  protocols and confidentiality protections must be planned for early in the design, and  there must be staff who are on the cutting edge of new information technologies used to  link data.  These protections should be at least as strong as the protections in the federal  statistical system under the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical  Efficiency Act.    ● Future-friendly​ - As new technologies and methods are developed, a data service must have the ability to adapt to new conditions, while preserving the intent and integrity of  the original vision of increased data access with privacy and confidentiality protections.    ● Funding - ​Long term and sustainable funding is vital. Long term funding will provide stability and certainty needed for researchers and agencies to make the commitment to  using a data service. While a fee-based model could be explored as supplemental  funding, direct appropriations will be necessary to support initial start up costs and  sufficient expert staffing to support a well-run entity.  In addition to the comments offered here, we recommend the committee consider the  characteristics and solutions presented in a 2020 Data Foundation white paper funded by the  Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, which specifically addressed this question and identified topics for  further consideration of the committee.​2​ The white paper considers strategies for establishing a National Secure Data Service designed to support evidence-building and statistical activities,  consistent with the recommendations of the Evidence Commission.   The Data Coalition Initiative and its members look forward to being an ongoing resource for  you. If you have any questions about these comments or other areas our members’ expertise can  address, please contact me at ​corinna.turbes@datafoundation.org​.    Sincerely,   2 N. Hart and N. Potok. ​Modernizing U.S. Data Infrastructure: Design Considerations for Implementing a National  Secure Data Service to Improve Statistics and Evidence Building​. Washington, D.C.: Data Foundation, 2020. Available at: ​https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3700156       Corinna Turbes  Managing Director of the Data Coalition Initiative       About the Data Coalition Initiative    The Data Coalition is an initiative of the non-profit Data Foundation. The membership-based  initiative facilitates a strong national data community and advocates for responsible policies to  make government data high-quality, accessible, and usable. The Data Coalition’s work unites the  data communities that focus on data science, management, evaluation, statistics, and  technology, including individuals in companies, nonprofit organizations, and academia.  