 ANONYMOUS, First name M from Washington, DC   Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on Data for Evidence Building. As a longtime data practitioner, I would like to submit the following comments. Central Questions 1. The main challenges faced by all levels of government include procuring technologies and tools to centralize data and properly monitor access, knowledge on how to protect privacy, and understanding equity in existing data. The procurement process is lengthy and cumbersome. It doesn't allow for flexibility in design or any trial and error. Adjusting the sole source and piggyback contracts could prove useful in this regard. A better understanding of privacy promotions is needed. Data stewards should know where the data is coming from, who it does and does not represent, that de-idntifying is not a substitute for privacy, and that metadata should not be exposed. Equity in data is also needed. Who is represented and, in many cases, who is not represented in the data. People not represented may be the most at risk for harms from decisions made using a data that does not include them. 2. The Census Bureau offers some of the best data for policy making. They are in the process of increasing transparency and creating formal privacy protections. 3. Frameworks, policies, practices, and methods are still evolving. Procurement is once again an area ripe for improvement. Having a procurement process that reflects policy will help. Solutions should be accessible to everyone - terms and conditions for website use and providing data should be clear and, literally, up front. It should be the first thing someone sees when asked for data or visiting a public website. Digital content should be easy to read for all levels and abilities. Cybersecurity training should be required for staff, with annual refresher courses, and offered to the public for free. Proper funding should be given to support operations and testing of new technologies and methodologies. Incentives can be given to jurisdictions that collaborate on projects and include the public in their design process. Troubleshooting support should be available, for government employees and the public accessing the data, at a minimum during business hours. Collaboration with the private sector could be useful. However, contracts and agreements should always benefit and protect the public. They should never be written to the vendor's advantage. 4. The creation of a National Secure Data Service could be useful if it has the following essential features: The ability to work across agencies and departments. The ability to audit current data practices. Inclusion of multi-disciplinary (sector, thought, demographic) outreach and feedback loops. 5. Privacy can be protected by formalizing data protections and taking into consideration individual, attribute, and inference modes of re-identification. Secure Data Access 6. A data service should have robust privacy protections in place such as the requirements to sign agreements not to share data. Accessibility of confidential data with a justified purpose only. Enforce consequences to breaking agreements. Use best data practices like encryption, limit data portability. 7. Public transparency of how data is used should be required of governments. Meta and paradata should have the same protections as all other datasets. Please show the numbers that data lowers cost. Technology systems required to support data are costly and privacy protections take vigilance, as the needle is always moving for nefarious actors. In addition, what is the cost to individuals not represented in the data? Data and cybersecurity trainings take effort and we should move away from the narrative of cost saving. Protecting privacy is a national, state, and local security issue not to be taken lightly (or provided to the lowest bidder). Data Services to Federal, State, Local Agencies and the Public 8. The most pressing need is data that is fit for use. Federal agencies need to work with state and local officials to understand these use cases and how they interact with each other. Sharing data should occur only through protected communication lines. Data should be encrypted in transit and at rest. Clear guidelines, trainings on how to access the    data, and continually updating protections should be monitored and implemented. 9. Explainability is key for communication. Finding a common language will go a long way. For example, a term like "differential" resonates differently depending upon discipline. Figuring out those tension points before a project and adjusting when needed during the process will go a long way for collaboration. Infrastructure for Meeting Public and Evidence Building Needs 10. No cost education, access to best practices, and the use of intermediaries would assist with capacity and needs. The federal government is in a better position to provide these than local governments.  